Frontiers | Editorial: Nanotechnology-based devices and systems for enhanced sensitivity and efficiency in biomedical applications Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology About us About us Who we are Mission and values History Leadership Awards Impact and progress Frontiers' impact Our annual reports Thought leadership Publishing model How we publish Open access Quality and research integrity Peer review Research Topics Publish your data Fee policy Services Societies National consortia Institutional partnerships Collaborators More from Frontiers Frontiers Forum Frontiers Planet Prize Press office Sustainability Career opportunities Contact us All journals All articles Submit your research Search Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology Sections Sections Biofabrication Biomaterials Biomechanics Bioprocess Engineering Biosafety and Biosecurity Biosensors and Biomolecular Electronics Cell and Gene Therapy Industrial Biotechnology Nanobiotechnology Organoids and Organ-On-A-Chip Synthetic Biology Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine Articles Research Topics Editorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editors Mission & scope Facts Journal sections Open access statement Copyright statement Quality For authors Why submit? Article types Author guidelines Editor guidelines Publishing fees Submission checklist Contact editorial office About us About us Who we are Mission and values History Leadership Awards Impact and progress Frontiers' impact Our annual reports Thought leadership Publishing model How we publish Open access Quality and research integrity Peer review Research Topics Publish your data Fee policy Services Societies National consortia Institutional partnerships Collaborators More from Frontiers Frontiers Forum Frontiers Planet Prize Press office Sustainability Career opportunities Contact us All journals All articles Submit your research Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology Sections Sections Biofabrication Biomaterials Biomechanics Bioprocess Engineering Biosafety and Biosecurity Biosensors and Biomolecular Electronics Cell and Gene Therapy Industrial Biotechnology Nanobiotechnology Organoids and Organ-On-A-Chip Synthetic Biology Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine Articles Research Topics Editorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editors Mission & scope Facts Journal sections Open access statement Copyright statement Quality For authors Why submit? Article types Author guidelines Editor guidelines Publishing fees Submission checklist Contact editorial office Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology Sections Sections Biofabrication Biomaterials Biomechanics Bioprocess Engineering Biosafety and Biosecurity Biosensors and Biomolecular Electronics Cell and Gene Therapy Industrial Biotechnology Nanobiotechnology Organoids and Organ-On-A-Chip Synthetic Biology Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine Articles Research Topics Editorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editors Mission & scope Facts Journal sections Open access statement Copyright statement Quality For authors Why submit? Article types Author guidelines Editor guidelines Publishing fees Submission checklist Contact editorial office Submit your research Search EDITORIAL article Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. , 02 October 2025 Sec. Biosensors and Biomolecular Electronics Volume 13 - 2025 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2025.1688121 Published in Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology Biosensors and Biomolecular Electronics 4.8 impact factor 8.8 citescore Part of a Research Topic Nanotechnology-based devices and systems for enhanced sensitivity and efficiency in biomedical applications 15k views 6 articles Editor & Reviewers Edited by D ( Dan (Annie) Du Reviewed by E S Elif Seymour A D Ashwin Dhakal Outline Author contributions Funding Conflict of interest Generative AI statement Publisher’s note References EDITORIAL article Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. , 02 October 2025 Sec. Biosensors and Biomolecular Electronics Volume 13 - 2025 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2025.1688121 Editorial: Nanotechnology-based devices and systems for enhanced sensitivity and efficiency in biomedical applications D C Donato Conteduca 1 * C K Casper Kunstmann-Olsen 2 S D Steven D. Quinn 3,4 1. Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA, United States 2. Mads Clausen Institute, University of Southern Denmark, Sonderborg, Denmark 3. School of Physics, Engineering, and Technology, University of York, York, United Kingdom 4. York Biomedical Research Institute, University of York, York, United Kingdom See more Article metrics View details Editorial on the Research Topic Nanotechnology-based devices and systems for enhanced sensitivity and efficiency in biomedical applications In the last decade, we have observed an explosive increase in the use of nanotechnologies applied to important biomedical problems, driven by their ability to facilitate highly specific and selective interactions with biological targets at the nanoscale. Technological advances in nanofabrication techniques, including scalability, integrability, and reliability of devices, are driving the biosensing evolution. In particular, they offer a remarkable contribution in overcoming typical challenges for sensing targets at the nanoscale, by controlling the interaction with the analytes with stronger and more precise modalities, as well as higher throughput with better cost-efficiency. The implementation of biosensors with biocompatible materials is fostering the translation from the lab bench to clinical practice for clinical applications and in-vivo studies, minimising or preventing risks for patients and facilitating the regulatory approval as medical devices ( Sindhwani and Chan, 2021 ). Among the wide range of biomedical and bioengineering applications that leverage nanoscale interactions with biological targets, nanotechnologies have experienced especially rapid growth in medical diagnostics and therapeutics, as well as in fundamental research in biophysics and medicine, for example, in elucidating disease onset and progression, characterising immune responses and enabling targeted drug delivery ( Kirtane et al., 2021 ). The integration of diverse techniques such as optical, electrical, magnetic, and microfluidic methods, with emerging materials, including nanomaterials, quantum dots, and nanostructured substrates, has been shown to significantly improve both sensing and imaging capabilities. These advances enable the investigation of a broad variety of biological targets across multiple length scales, from the microscale (i.e., cells, tissue, bacteria) to the nanoscale (e.g., proteins, nucleic acids, extracellular vesicles, and viruses) ( Flynn et al., 2023 ; Xue et al., 2022 ; Altug et al., 2022 ; Conteduca et al., 2021 ; Xiong et al., 2022 ). Furthermore, the development of active systems capable of manipulating nanomaterial-biotarget interactions using external forces within controlled environments has led to significant advances in drug development and delivery. These systems also offer enhanced sensitivity for the precise control and investigation of increasingly smaller targets, down to the level of single molecules and nucleic acids ( Ying et al., 2022 ). Nanotechnology-based systems have demonstrated the ability to overcome key limitations of conventional bulk systems, which often suffer from limited sensitivity, require large sample volumes and are constrained by high costs and slow processing times–factors that frequently hinder their applicability in clinical studies. This Research Topic aimed to highlight technological innovations in the fabrication and characterisation of nanotechnology-based devices for biomedical applications, focusing on solutions that improve system integrability and reliability to facilitate the transition from the bench to clinical studies. Moreover, new theoretical and computational studies are also included to address current limitations of systems in biosensing, by taking into account effects observable in experimental activities, such as thermal effects and flow dynamics for in-vivo studies. The articles published in this Research Topic investigate in greater depth several key themes and objectives of the collection. Notably, Lu et al. in their article “ Dielectrophoretic capture of Escherichia coli and boar sperms using ULSI-fabricated three-dimensional protruding TiN nano-electrode arrays ” present a nanoelectrode configuration designed to generate dielectrophoresis for the separation of live and dead sperm cells, with significant implications for fertility research. Despite the simplicity and fast response of conventional methods, they often suffer from insufficient sperm cell recovery, leading to incomplete or ambiguous outcomes. In this work, the authors implemented an array of 3D nanoelectrodes made from titanium nitride (TiN), which is a biocompatible material and suitable for semiconductor CMOS processes. These nanoelectrodes enhanced the local electric field strength by ⁓ 483%, producing a stronger dielectrophoretic effect and enabling effective cell confinement at lower applied voltages. This configuration also reduced Joule heating, further minimised by the application of an insulating layer on the metal wires, which is critical for preserving sperm motility and maintaining membrane integrity, a key factor to separate dead from live biological targets (e.g., sperms and bacteria). The authors demonstrated a maximum capture efficiency of 80% with processing rates of 2.4 mL/h and 0.2 mL/h for sperm and bacteria, respectively. This Research Topic also features a complementary study by Liao et al. titled “ Innovative CMOS-fabricated dielectrophoretic chip: application of 3D TiN nano-electrode arrays with adjustable electrode spacing in sperm capture ”. In this work, the authors exploited the advantages offered by the 3D TiN nanoelectrode fabrication processes to improve throughput and enable faster sperm capture. The use of nanoelectrodes enhanced the local electric field by a factor of 5, maximising the dielectrophoretic force on the cells. The system incorporates a controllable 7 × 7 array of electrodes, enabling the simultaneous detection and manipulation of multiple sperm cells with a capture efficiency of 60% and a processing rate of up to 6 mL/h. Importantly, the design offers scalability, providing a clear pathway for further parallelization and integration in high-throughput diagnostic applications. The Research Topic includes a theoretical study exploring the role of magnetic nanoparticles applied in medical diagnostics and drug delivery. Van Dieren et al. in their work “ Computational modeling of superparamagnetic nanoparticle-based (affinity) diagnostics ” employed computational modeling to investigate the flow of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) in blood vessels under the influence of external magnetic fields. A finite element method was used to simulate the flow dynamics of iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs), incorporating key parameters such as viscosity and particle flow rate. The authors observed that the concentration of MNPs required for effective diagnostic performance is highly dependent on both the sensitivity of the detection scheme and the intrinsic properties of the MNPs. The authors also discussed ongoing challenges limiting the clinical translation of IONPs, particularly their limited biocompatibility. They emphasised the need for long-term in vivo studies to better characterise the clearance mechanisms of MNPs within the vasculature, thereby informing model refinement and minimising potential toxicity. Finally, the Research Topic is completed with an article focusing on a surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) platform for the early detection of diabetic retinopathy (DR). Zeng et al. in their work “ Nanoenzymatic SERS bifunctional detection platform based on recognition competition strategy for ultrasensitive detection of diabetic retinopathy-related biomarkers ” developed Au@PD nanorods modified with single-stranded DNA1 (ssDNA1), employed as nanoenzymatic probes. The substrate is modified with an array of Au trioctahedral (AuTOHs) modified with aptamer strands and single-stranded DNA2 (ssDNA2). In the presence of VEGF in the serum sample, one of the most critical biomarkers in the early diagnosis of DR, the target binds to the aptamer with higher affinity than the aptamer-ssDNA2 interaction. This process causes a displacement of the ssDNA2, which can hybridize with ssDNA1, with a consequent attachment of the Au@PD nanorods onto the substrate and a relevant increase of the SERS signal, proportional to the VEGF concentration. The sensing platform showed excellent peroxidase (POD) activity, a SERS enhancement >10 9 , a limit of detection of 0.11 pg/mL, an assay time of only 14 min, and high reliability directly from complex serum samples. This Research Topic contributes to highlighting possible solutions to consider for future directions in the field of biosensors, in terms of manufacturing reliability and improvement of sensing performance, aiming at facilitating the use of such systems in a clinical scenario for personalised medicine, with strong potential for fields such as pathology, pharmacology, and immunology. In addition to technological advances, artificial intelligence applied to data analysis is contributing remarkably to the exponential growth of the biosensing field, typically focusing on minimising the noise contribution with better sensor resolution and accuracy ( Akkaş et al., 2025 ). Furthermore, in recent years, machine learning has also been implemented to directly optimize the design of biosensors ( Rao et al., 2024 ). The combination of these computational methods together with high-resolution nanofabrication techniques is paving the way for the next-generation biosensors, characterized by higher reliability and more tolerance to external factors that could affect the measurements of specific biotargets, facilitating the integration of the sensing devices in cost-efficient point-of-care systems. This strategy has the potential to overcome the current challenges for the clinical translation of biosensing systems, typically associated with too high costs, the requirement of expert users and insufficient sensitivity for many pathological studies, by offering cost-efficient and accessible solutions without compromising the diagnostic accuracy. Statements Author contributions DC: Writing – review and editing, Writing – original draft. CK-O: Writing – review and editing, Writing – original draft. SQ: Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing. Funding The author(s) declare that no financial support was received for the research and/or publication of this article. Conflict of interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Generative AI statement The author(s) declare that no Generative AI was used in the creation of this manuscript. Any alternative text (alt text) provided alongside figures in this article has been generated by Frontiers with the support of artificial intelligence and reasonable efforts have been made to ensure accuracy, including review by the authors wherever possible. If you identify any issues, please contact us. Publisher’s note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. References 1 Akkaş T. Reshadsedghi M. Şen M. Kılıç V. Horzum N. ( 2025 ). The role of artificial intelligence in advancing biosensor technology: past, present, and future perspectives . Adv. Mater. 37 ( 34 ), 2504796 . 10.1002/adma.202504796 Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar 2 Altug H. Oh S. H. Maier S. A. Homola J. ( 2022 ). Advances and applications of nanophotonic biosensors . Nat. Nanotechnol. 17 , 5 – 16 . 10.1038/s41565-021-01045-5 Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar 3 Conteduca D. Barth I. Pitruzzello G. Reardon C. P. Martins E. R. Krauss T. F. ( 2021 ). Dielectric nanohole array metasurface for high-resolution near-field sensing and imaging . Nat. Commun. 12 , 3293 . 10.1038/s41467-021-23357-9 Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar 4 Flynn C. D. Chang D. Mahmud A. Yousefi H. Das J. Riordan K. T. et al ( 2023 ). Biomolecular sensors for advanced physiological monitoring . Nat. Rev. Bioeng. 1 , 560 – 575 . 10.1038/s44222-023-00067-z Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar 5 Kirtane A. R. Verma M. Karandikar P. Furin J. Langer R. Traverso G. ( 2021 ). Nanotechnology approaches for global infectious diseases . Nat. Nanotechnol. 16 , 369 – 384 . 10.1038/s41565-021-00866-8 Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar 6 Rao L. Yuan Y. Shen X. Yu G. Chen X. ( 2024 ). Designing nanotheranostics with machine learning . Nat. Nanotechnol. 19 , 1769 – 1781 . 10.1038/s41565-024-01753-8 Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar 7 Sindhwani S. Chan W. C. W. ( 2021 ). Nanotechnology for modern medicine: next step towards clinical translation . J. Intern. Med. 290 ( 3 ), 486 – 498 . 10.1111/joim.13254 Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar 8 Xiong Y. Huang Q. Canady T. D. Barya P. Liu S. Arogundade O. H. et al ( 2022 ). Photonic crystal enhanced fluorescence emission and blinking suppression for single quantum dot digital resolution biosensing . Nat. Commun. 13 , 4647 . 10.1038/s41467-022-32387-w Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar 9 Xue M. Mackin C. Weng W. H. Zhu J. Luo Y. Luo S. X. L. et al ( 2022 ). Integrated biosensor platform based on graphene transistor arrays for real-time high-accuracy ion sensing . Nat. Commun. 13 , 5064 . 10.1038/s41467-022-32749-4 Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar 10 Ying Y. L. Hu Z. L. Zhang S. Qing Y. Fragasso A. Maglia G. et al ( 2022 ). Nanopore-based technologies beyond DNA sequencing . Nat. Nanotechnol. 17 , 1136 – 1146 . 10.1038/s41565-022-01193-2 Pubmed Abstract CrossRef Google Scholar Summary Keywords biomedical application (E) , nanotechnology (NT) , biosensing , nanofabrication , nanomaterials (ENMs) Citation Conteduca D, Kunstmann-Olsen C and Quinn SD (2025) Editorial: Nanotechnology-based devices and systems for enhanced sensitivity and efficiency in biomedical applications . Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 13:1688121. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2025.1688121 Received 18 August 2025 Accepted 23 September 2025 Published 02 October 2025 Volume 13 - 2025 Edited by Dan (Annie) Du , Washington State University, United States Reviewed by Ashwin Dhakal , The University of Missouri, United States Elif Seymour , iRiS Kinetics, United States Updates Check for updates Copyright © 2025 Conteduca, Kunstmann-Olsen and Quinn. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. *Correspondence: Donato Conteduca, donato88.conteduca@gmail.com Disclaimer All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Article metrics View details Download PDF Download other formats ReadCube epub XML Cite article Share article Frontiers' impact Annual report 2025 We focused on strengthening the foundations that matter most - quality, transparency, and trust. Download our latest report to read about our progress. Annual report 2025 PDF Download other format ReadCube epub XML Outline Cite Share Metrics More Outline Cite article Copy to clipboard Copy citation Export citation file BibTex EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file Share article Facebook X LinkedIn Email WeChat Share on WeChat Scan with WeChat to share this article Article metrics Guidelines Author guidelines Services for authors Policies and publication ethics Editor guidelines Fee policy Explore Articles Research Topics Journals How we publish Outreach Frontiers Forum Frontiers Policy Labs Frontiers for Young Minds Frontiers Planet Prize Connect Help center Emails and alerts Contact us Submit Career opportunities Follow us © 2026 Frontiers Media SA. All rights reserved. Privacy policy | Terms and conditions | Accessibility statement