Development of Innovation Cooperation in the Time of COVID-19 Pandemic - European Research Studies Journal Menu search input Home Issues Submit Instructions To Authors Submission About Ethics and Malpractice Copyright and Open Access Journal Editors Editorial Board Contact Us EUROPEAN RESEARCH STUDIES JOURNAL ISSN: 1108-2976p / 3057-4331e Home Issues Submit Instructions To Authors Submission About Ethics and Malpractice Copyright and Open Access Journal Editors Editorial Board Contact Us Close search input Development of Innovation Cooperation in the Time of COVID-19 Pandemic Lukasz Puslecki, Marek Dabrowski, Mateusz Puslecki European Research Studies Journal , Volume XXIV, Special Issue 1 - Part 1, 1049-1073, 2021 DOI: 10.35808/ersj/2087 Abstract: Purpose: The aim of the article is to present the development of new partnerships and R&D alliances in the time of COVID-19 pandemic. Design/Methodology/Approach: The main method applied in this research was the scientific study. Descriptive, comparative, documentation and desk research methods were used. Additionally, the authors used the methods of deductive and inductive forecasting. Findings: The authors present new partnerships undertaken by biopharma (biotech and pharma) companies (in and outside the industry) in order to face pandemic and to discover and deliver a new vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 to the market. In addition, the research projects in the European Union focused on the development of diagnostics, treatments, vaccines, epidemiology, preparedness and response to outbreaks, socioeconomics, production and digital technologies as well infrastructures and data resources that make it possible this research will be presented. Practical Implications: It should be taken into consideration that due to the current situation caused by pandemic the cooperation of companies and all entities in the whole biopharmaceutical R&D innovation ecosystem is even more challenging than before COVID-19. Biopharma–university alliances can significantly increase the likelihood of creating better medical therapy for patients. Originality/value: Results of this cooperation enable a number of innovative projects given the significant pressure on innovativeness and challenges caused by the pandemic. Download Article Cite Article (APA Style) Lukasz Puslecki Et Al (2021). Development of Innovation Cooperation in the Time of COVID-19 Pandemic, European Research Studies Journal Volume XXIV Special Issue 1 - Part 1, 1049-1073 Copyright © 2026 European Reasearch Studies Journal Privacy Policy Terms And Conditions Sitemap