(function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-T2Q9C23B'); Molecular classification and construction of prognostic risk model via machine learning based on metabolic-related genes in hepatocellular carcinoma - Wang - Translational Cancer Research var journal_path = 'tcr'; var up_path = 'https://tcr.amegroups.org/manager/uploadImage/2'; var submit_upload_path = 'https://tcr.amegroups.org/author/saveSubmit/4'; document.cookie="user_id=0;path=/"; Have a website account? Log In or Register for exclusive website content. &nbsp;Subscribe Advanced Search /** * 搜索表单提交方法 * 使用 Apply [All-Fields] 方式搜索 * term 搜索词有值则导向【Apply高级搜索结果页面】，无值则导向【Apply高级搜索页面】 * journals 默认为当前杂志 * issues 默认为当前杂志 */ function applySearch(search) { // DC杂志ID let dcJournalId = 2; // 当前杂志缩写 let journalPath = 'tcr' // 搜索词 let query = $('#search-query').val(); // 当前环境 let app_local = 'prod'; // Apply URL let apply_url = ''; // 判定环境 if ( app_local === 'test' ) { apply_url = '//apply.amegroups.net/'; }else{ apply_url = '//apply.amegroups.com/'; } // 判断搜索词是否为空和是否有DC杂志ID if (search && query && dcJournalId) { // apply_url = apply_url+'s?term='+query+'&journals='+dcJournalId+'&issues='+dcJournalId; apply_url = apply_url+'s?term='+query+'&journals='+dcJournalId; }else{ // 判断是否有杂志缩写 if ( journalPath ) { apply_url = apply_url+'advanced?term='+journalPath+'[Journal]'; }else{ apply_url = apply_url+'advanced'; } } // 另窗口打开 window.open(apply_url); return false; } Home Journal Info About tcr Indexing Editor-in-Chief Co-Editor-in-Chief Associate Editors-in-Chief Editorial Board Former Editorial Board Testimonials Peer Review Process Supplements and Series Advertising Policy For Authors Author Instructions Online Submission Submit Multimedia Files Reference Style AME Editing Service Interviews with Outstanding Authors For Reviewer Guidelines for Reviewers Online Review Reviewers Ethics and Policies Journal Management (Editorial Roles) Editorial Policies Publication Ethics Policy Research Ethics Policy Human and Animal Rights Authorship and Contributorship Informed Consent Policy Conflicts of Interest Data Sharing Policy Open Access Statement Content Licensing Copyright and Permission Quality Control System Data and Reproducibility Policy of Screening for Plagiarism Process Policy of Dealing with Allegations of Research Misconduct Corrections and Retractions Complaints and Appeals Special Contents Special Series (Published) Special Series (Ongoing) Interviews with Guest Editors Meet the Experts Interviews with Editorial Board Members Archives Online First News Article Processing Charges Home / Vol 15, No 3 (March 31, 2026) / Molecular classification and construction of prognostic risk model via machine learning based on metabolic-related genes... Molecular classification and construction of prognostic risk model via machine learning based on metabolic-related genes in hepatocellular carcinoma h2 * { color: #fff } .highlight-box { background: #ddd; padding: 10px; } .meta.down { text-align: right; } .meta.down .authors { font-weight: bold; } .meta.down .affiliation { font-style: italic; } .meta.down .affiliation aff country:after { content: " "; display: block; } .controller-article.action-view .figure.table { background-color: #FFFCF0; border: 1px solid #eac3af; border-radius: 5px; padding: 0; } .controller-article.action-view .figure.table .figure-content { padding: 1.3846em; } .controller-article.action-view .figure.table .table_wrapper { max-height: 80vh; overflow: auto; } .controller-article.action-view .figure.table .table_wrapper table tr td img { max-width: 200px; } .controller-article.action-view .figure.table .table_wrapper .tblwrap-foot { font-size: .8461em; margin: 1.3846em 0; } Original Article Molecular classification and construction of prognostic risk model via machine learning based on metabolic-related genes in hepatocellular carcinoma Hongkang Wang 1# , Yonghao Li 2# , Huayu Zhang 3# , Yaozhong Ping 2 , Wan Zhang 4* , Ying&rsquo;ao Chen 2* , Bing Han 5* 1 Faculty of Science and Engineering , The University of Manchester , Manchester , UK ; 2 BamRock Research Department , Suzhou BamRock Biotechnology Ltd. , Suzhou , China ; 3 Faculty of Biomedical Science , King&rsquo;s College London , London , UK ; 4 Nucleic Acid Durg Technology Innovation Platform , Suzhou Industrial Park Biotech Development Co. Ltd. , Suzhou , China ; 5 Division of Hepatobiliary and Transplantation Surgery, Department of General Surgery, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital , The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School , Nanjing , China Contributions: (I) Conception and design: W Zhang, Y Chen, B Han; (II) Administrative support: W Zhang, Y Chen, B Han; (III) Provision of study materials or patients: H Wang, Y Li, H Zhang; (IV) Collection and assembly of data: Y Ping; (V) Data analysis and interpretation: H Wang, Y Li, H Zhang; (VI) Manuscript writing: All authors; (VII) Final approval of manuscript: All authors. # These authors contributed equally to this work. * These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence to: Wan Zhang, PhD. Nucleic Acid Durg Technology Innovation Platform, Suzhou Industrial Park Biotech Development Co. Ltd., B5 Building, 218 Xinghu Str., Suzhou 215123, China. Email: zhangwan_2020@163.com ; Ying&rsquo;ao Chen, ME. BamRock Research Department, Suzhou BamRock Biotechnology Ltd., B4 Building, 218 Xinghu Str., Suzhou 215123, China. Email: 2569206885@qq.com ; Bing Han, PhD. Division of Hepatobiliary and Transplantation Surgery, Department of General Surgery, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, No. 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210008, China. Email: Dr.Hanbing@njglyy.com . Background: Despite recent advances in therapeutic strategies for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), patient prognosis remains unsatisfactory. Accumulating evidence indicated that dysregulation of metabolism-related pathways and genes plays a pivotal role in HCC progression. Accordingly, metabolic-associated genes hold promise as prognostic biomarkers and potential predictors of therapeutic response. This study aimed to identify distinct metabolic subtypes of HCC and compare their clinicopathological and genomic features. Prognosis-associated metabolic genes were screened using an integrated machine learning framework, from which a risk-scoring model was constructed to simultaneously predict HCC prognosis and immunotherapy response. Methods: A systematic evaluation of metabolic patterns was conducted to elucidate the association between metabolism and HCC. To establish a prognostic and therapeutic prediction model, we developed an integrative framework based on machine learning algorithms by using comprehensive profiling of RNA sequencing data. Subsequently, nine metabolic-related genes were identified, and their biological functions were validated with clinical characteristics, immune cell infiltration, and complicated cellular signaling pathways. Results: Two molecular clusters with distinct clinical and biological characteristics were identified in HCC. Utilizing the computational framework, a metabolic-based prognostic model was constructed, which exhibited superior prognostic accuracy and outperformed previously reported models. An efficient clinical nomogram integrating the risk score with clinicopathological variables was subsequently established. Metabolic status was found to be closely associated with immunological features, and the proposed algorithms effectively predicted immunotherapy responsiveness. Furthermore, the risk score demonstrated predictive power for drug sensitivity in HCC patients. A multilevel evaluation of prognosis-related metabolic genes confirmed the stability and robustness of the model. Conclusions: This study systematically demonstrated the relationship between metabolic alterations and HCC. We established a robust prognostic model which was capable of accurately predicting patient survival, prognosis, and therapeutic responses. This model held promise for improving clinical decision-making and advancing personalized treatment strategies in HCC. Keywords: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); machine learning; prognostic model; metabolic-related genes; immunotherapy Submitted Nov 06, 2025. Accepted for publication Feb 04, 2026. Published online Feb 26, 2026. doi: 10.21037/tcr-2025-aw-2444 Highlight box Key findings &bull; Nine critical metabolic-related genes were identified in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC): EZH2, PIGU, UQCRH, G6PD, ADH4, ENO1, LPCAT1, AKR1B15 , and FTCD . &bull; A novel metabolic-related molecular classification was identified and proposed two subtypes from metabolism perspectives. In addition, the metabolic gene-based prognostic model exhibited robust predictive performance for HCC patients by machine learning. What is known and what is new? &bull; Metabolic-related genes are known to play a crucial role in tumorigenesis, progression, and the tumor microenvironment of HCC. However, the prognostic value of a specific metabolic-related gene signature in HCC requires further exploration. &bull; This study developed and validated a prognostic risk model based on these nine specific metabolic-related genes ( EZH2, PIGU, UQCRH, G6PD, ADH4, ENO1, LPCAT1, AKR1B15 , and FTCD ) for HCC. What is the implication, and what should change now? &bull; The metabolic-associated model developed in this study may have clinical implications for prognosis and immunotherapy guidance in patients with HCC. &bull; Further studies are still needed to explore the regulatory mechanisms of EZH2, PIGU, UQCRH, G6PD, ADH4, ENO1, LPCAT1, AKR1B15 , and FTCD in HCC. Introduction Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide, with its incidence rises annually. It ranks as the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths and the sixth most frequently diagnosed cancer globally ( 1 ). As the predominant histological subtype of liver cancer, HCC accounts for approximately 70&ndash;85% of primary liver cancer cases. Over 700,000 new HCC cases are diagnosed annually worldwide, and the estimated number of deaths due to liver cancer worldwide is more than 600,000, with nearly half originating from China ( 2 ). Due to the insidious early symptoms and rapid progression of HCC, around 80% of patients are diagnosed at advanced stages, losing eligibility for curative surgical resection. This results in ineffective interventions and poor prognoses, with an average 5-year survival rate of only 12.1% ( 3 , 4 ). Clinical staging systems, such as the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) staging system, plays a central role in HCC management and serves as routine tools for clinicians to assess disease status and treatment requirements ( 5 ). However, focusing solely on clinicopathological features while neglecting individual molecular biological characteristics often leads to suboptimal prognostic assessments and generalized treatment outcomes ( 6 ). For HCC, which is characterized by high heterogeneity, achieving personalized treatment is crucial for improving patient outcomes ( 7 , 8 ). Therefore, identifying novel molecular subtypes and biomarkers is imperative to elucidate molecular features, facilitate prognostic stratification, and ultimately optimize clinical management and prognosis in HCC. In recent years, immunotherapy has emerged as a groundbreaking treatment for HCC, representing one of the most promising therapies offering potential curative opportunities for cancer patients ( 9 , 10 ). Immunotherapy aims to activate or enhance the patient&rsquo;s immune system to recognize and attack cancer cells. Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) inhibitors have been globally adopted as first-line treatments, demonstrating improved clinical outcomes ( 11 ). Nevertheless, not all patients respond to immunotherapy. The heterogeneity of the tumor microenvironment contributes to significant clinical variations in treatment responses, and existing predictive biomarkers for immunotherapy remain suboptimal. No effective biomarkers could clearly identify responsive populations ( 12 - 14 ). Thus, there is an urgent need to investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms and identify robust biomarkers to predict which HCC patients would benefit from immunotherapy. Accumulating evidence highlights the critical role of metabolic-associated genes in immune system regulation and tumor immune microenvironment modulation ( 15 ). To meet the heightened energy and biosynthetic demands of rapid proliferation, tumor cells undergo metabolic reprogramming ( 16 , 17 ). This adaptive mechanism not only endows HCC cells with enhanced proliferative and invasive capacities but also reshapes immune cell functions within the liver, facilitating tumor immune evasion. Metabolic reprogramming in immune cells alters their functionality ( 18 ). For instance, metabolic shifts in T cells within the HCC microenvironment influence their polarization and anti-tumor activity. Lipid and glucose metabolism alterations in Treg cells affect their expansion and suppressive roles in HCC ( 19 ). Fatty acid oxidation changes in macrophages impact their polarization and functional states ( 20 ). Glycolytic metabolism in peritumoral monocytes modulates T lymphocyte cytotoxicity against tumor cells, ultimately affecting patient prognosis and immunotherapy responses ( 21 ). However, few metabolic genes have been systematically identified in HCC. Therefore, there is a pressing need for comprehensive approaches to systematically identify metabolic-associated genes involved in tumor immune microenvironment and immune pathways regulation. This study aimed to identify distinct HCC metabolic subtypes based on differentially expressed metabolic genes and compared their clinicopathological features and genomic alterations. We utilized a machine learning algorithm which integrated framework to screen metabolic-associated genes linked to prognosis. Using these prognostic-related genes, we constructed a risk scoring model capable of simultaneously predicting HCC prognosis and immunotherapy responses. We present this article in accordance with the TRIPOD reporting checklist (available at https://tcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tcr-2025-aw-2444/rc ). Methods Sample data collection and processing Gene expression matrices of HCC patients were extracted from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) databases ( https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/ ). To ensure cross-database comparability and minimize batch effects, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) transcripts per million (TPM) data from TCGA were log2-transformed and normalized. After excluding samples with incomplete clinicopathological information, a total of 363 HCC patients with surgically resected specimens were enrolled from the TCGA database. The &ldquo;TCGAbiolinks&rdquo; R package was used to download somatic mutation profiles and copy number variation (CNV) data of HCC patients. Mutation data were visualized using the &ldquo;maftools&rdquo; and &ldquo;RCircos&rdquo; R packages ( 22 ). To reduce false-positive rates, only non-silent mutations (Missense_Mutation, Nonsense_Mutation, Nonstop_Mutation, Frame_Shift_Del, Frame_Shift_Ins, In_Frame_Del, and In_Frame_Ins) were retained. The &ldquo;maftools&rdquo; package was employed to analyze Mutation Annotation Format (MAF) files from TCGA, and the &ldquo;ComplexHeatmap&rdquo; package generated mutation waterfall plots. In the GISTIC copy number dataset, values of 2 and &minus;2 were defined as high-level amplifications and deep deletions, respectively. Additionally, GISTIC2.0 was applied to identify CNV regions with significant amplifications or deletions across chromosomes ( 23 ). The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and its subsequent amendments. In addition, gene expression profiles and corresponding clinical data were obtained from preprocessed projects within the HCCDB database ( http://lifeome.net:809/ ) for external validation, including HCCDB18, HCCDB25, and HCCDB30. These datasets contain bulk RNA-seq data along with associated clinical information from patients with HCC. HCCDB18 originates from the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC)-LIRI-JP project ( https://dcc.icgc.org/ ), HCCDB25 is derived from project OEP000321 ( https://www.biosino.org/node/ ), and HCCDB30 comes from project GSE148355 ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ ). Furthermore, immunohistochemistry data of metabolic genes was acquired from the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) database for further analysis ( https://www.proteinatlas.org/ ). Using QuPath v0.6.0, positive cell detection was performed with smoothed boundaries and consistent parameters across all samples, followed by semi-quantitative analysis of positive cell percentage ( 24 ). Consensus clustering analysis and survival analysis Human metabolic genes were obtained from the &ldquo;KEGGREST&rdquo; R package, collected from metabolic pathways in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database ( https://www.genome.jp/kegg/ ), resulting in metabolic genes were included in the analysis. Unsupervised K-means clustering based on Euclidean distance was applied to identify distinct molecular subtypes using the expression profiles of 119 differentially expressed metabolic genes selected via univariate Cox analysis. The R package &ldquo;ConsensusClusterPlus&rdquo; was used to execute this process and determine the optimal number of subtypes in TCGA-Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma (TCGA-LIHC) cohort ( 25 ). Results were further validated using cumulative distribution function (CDF) curves, Delta area plots, and the proportion of ambiguous clustering algorithm, with 1,000 iterations to ensure classification stability. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to visualize distribution differences between metabolic subtypes ( 26 ), To validate the subtype assignments, a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) analysis was performed using the mRNA expression data of the above metabolic genes. To assess the clinical relevance of metabolic subtypes, we investigated their associations with prognosis and immune-metabolic features. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were generated to compare overall survival (OS) between subtypes, with P&lt;0.05 considered statistically significant. Enrichment analysis of metabolic subtypes and immune-metabolic characteristics To investigate the underlying immunological and metabolic functional changes in each subtype, we performed single-sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) to calculate enrichment scores for metabolic signatures, reflecting the coordinated upregulation or downregulation of genes within specific metabolic pathways in individual samples ( 27 ), and a heatmap illustrating metabolic gene expression patterns across subtypes was created using the &ldquo;pheatmap&rdquo; R package. Immune and stromal scores for HCC patients were calculated using the &ldquo;estimate&rdquo; R package to evaluate immune cells infiltration levels and stromal cells levels ( 28 ). The &ldquo;GSVA&rdquo; R package was utilized to compute normalized enrichment scores (NES) for pathways and functional annotations via the gene set variation analysis (GSVA) method ( 29 ). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) based on differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and their log 2 [fold change (FC)] was performed using the &ldquo;clusterProfiler&rdquo; R package ( 30 , 31 ), with results visualized via the &ldquo;enrichplot&rdquo; R package. Gene sets &ldquo;c2.cp.kegg_legacy.v2025.1.Hs.symbols.gmt&rdquo; and &ldquo;h.all.v2025.1.Hs.symbols.gmt&rdquo; were downloaded from the MSigDB database for GSVA and GSEA analyses. A P&lt;0.05 indicated significant differences in KEGG pathways. Additionally, 12 metabolic signature gene sets and 32 immune signature gene sets were derived from previously published studies ( 32 - 34 ). Construction of risk scoring model and nomogram Using the &ldquo;caret&rdquo; R package, we utilized the tumor tissue samples from TCGA-LIHC as the training dataset. The ICGC-LIRI-JP project, OEP000321 project, and GSE148355 project are used for independent external validation datasets. To identify the prognostic-related metabolic genes as key characteristics, a machine learning algorithm integrated framework that incorporated 10 machine learning algorithms, such as random survival forest (RSF), partial least squares regression for Cox (plsRcox), supervised principal component (SuperPC), generalized boosted regression modeling (GBM), support vector machine (SVM), elastic net (Enet), least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), Ridge, StepCox (e.g., both, forward and backward), and CoxBoost based on the previous study ( 35 ). Via 10-fold cross-validation, we generated 101 algorithm combinations within TCGA-LIHC dataset for training prognostic models, and further validation was carried out in the GSE148355, OEP000321 and ICGC-LIRI-JP datasets. Upon comparison, the model that exhibited the highest average C-index among these four datasets was thus determined as the MEPM. We screened nine optimal metabolic genes from 119 prognostic-related differentially expressed genes via Univariate Cox regression analysis in the TCGA cohort, constructing a metabolic prognostic model (MEPM), as it facilitates model interpretation and practical implementation. The risk score formula was defined as: r i s k S c o r e = &sum; i = 1 n C o e f ( m i ) &times; E x p ( m i ) [1] Where Coef(m&#7522;) represented the Cox regression coefficient of metabolic gene i , and Exp(m&#7522;) denoted the expression value of gene i in each patient. Risk scores were predicted for all patients using the predict function from the &ldquo;survival&rdquo; and &ldquo;survminer&rdquo; R packages, and patients were stratified into high- and low-risk groups based on the median score. The clinical relevance of the risk model was assessed by evaluating associations between risk groups and prognosis, as well as clinicopathological features (e.g., age, gender and tumor stage). The concordance index (C-index) and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were used to validate the accuracy of the Cox regression model. Survival analysis and ROC curve analysis were further performed on external validation sets (ICGC, GSE148355, OEP000321). Kaplan-Meier curves compared OS between risk groups, with P&lt;0.05 indicating statistical significance. Relationships among metabolic subtypes, clinical variables, and risk scores were visualized using Sankey diagrams generated by the &ldquo;ggalluvial&rdquo; R package. The C-index of the risk score and other individual prognostic factors were compared via line plots. ROC curves for 1-, 2-, and 3-year survival predictions were plotted using the &ldquo;timeROC&rdquo; R package, with area under the curve (AUC) values quantifying model performance. To enhance clinical applicability, we established a nomogram that integrated the age, gender, tumor stage, and risk score of HCC patients using the &ldquo;rms&rdquo;, &ldquo;survival&rdquo;, and &ldquo;regplot&rdquo; R packages. The nomogram&rsquo;s predictive accuracy was evaluated by time-dependent ROC analysis and C-index calculations (using the &ldquo;timeROC&rdquo; and &ldquo;survcomp&rdquo; packages), which demonstrated its superiority over individual prognostic factors. Furthermore, calibration plots generated with the &ldquo;rms&rdquo; and &ldquo;survminer&rdquo; packages indicated a strong agreement between the predicted and observed survival probabilities at 1, 2, and 3 years. SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) summary plots, generated using the &ldquo;fastshap&rdquo; and &ldquo;shapviz&rdquo; R packages, provided interpretability by illustrating how individual gene features contributed to prognostic predictions. Variables were ranked by importance based on the mean absolute SHAP values. Role of the risk scoring model in predicting immunotherapy response To evaluate the utility of the risk score in predicting immunotherapy efficacy, we calculated risk scores based on normalized RNA-seq data and analyzed their association with prognosis and response to PD-L1 inhibitors. A series of correlation analyses were conducted between the risk score and established immunotherapy predictive markers, including checkpoint molecule expression, tumor mutational burden (TMB), and Tumor Immune Dysfunction and Exclusion (TIDE) scores, to assess the model&rsquo;s predictive value for immunotherapy response. TMB, a widely recognized biomarker for immunotherapy prediction, was calculated for each HCC patient in the TCGA cohort using somatic mutation data. The TIDE algorithm ( http://tide.dfci.harvard.edu/ ), which simulated two key mechanisms of tumor immune evasion&mdash;T cell dysfunction in tumors with high cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) infiltration and impaired T cell recruitment in tumors with low CTL levels ( 36 ), was applied to quantify immune evasion potential. Differences in checkpoint expression, TMB, TIDE scores, and risk scores between groups were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test, while Pearson correlation assessed the relationship between TMB and risk scores. To validate the model&rsquo;s predictive power for immunotherapy response, we included the GSE202069 cohort (HCC patients treated with anti-PD-1 therapy). Patients in these cohorts were stratified into two groups based on treatment response: progressive disease (PD)/stable disease (SD) and partial response (PR)/complete response (CR). To determine whether the biological functions and mechanisms identified in the two datasets were conserved, we performed Subclass Mapping (SubMap) analysis by using the GenePattern online tool ( https://www.genepattern.org/ ), a method that evaluates functional similarity between independent cohorts based on gene expression profiles ( 37 ). This approach comprehensively evaluated the risk model&rsquo;s ability to predict immunotherapy efficacy in HCC, enhancing its clinical generalizability. Estimation of drug sensitivity Drug response data for cancer cell lines were obtained from the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC; https://www.cancerrxgene.org ), which provided drug sensitivity information with half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) values (lower values indicated stronger drug responses). Transcriptomic data for liver cancer cell lines were also utilized. For drug response prediction, gene expression and response data from GDSC2 cancer cell lines (available via OSF: https://osf.io/c6tfx ) were used as training data, while TCGA gene expression TPM data served as testing data in HCC ( 38 ). For each patient, IC 50 values of compounds were estimated using the &ldquo;oncoPredict&rdquo; R package. Statistical analysis Two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were performed to compare features between subtypes and risk groups. The Mann-Whitney U test was applied for non-normally distributed variables. Spearman&rsquo;s rank correlation coefficient was calculated to assess associations between variables. Univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analyses were conducted to evaluate associations between variables and survival, followed by log-rank tests for survival comparisons. Contingency tables were analyzed using Chi-squared or Fisher&rsquo;s exact tests. All P values were two-tailed, with P&lt;0.05 considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were implemented in R (version 4.4.2). Results To clearly demonstrate the study design and analytical framework, a workflow diagram is provided below ( Figure 1 ). By integrating prognostic and metabolic-related gene expression profiles, we identified 257 DEGs, including significantly upregulated genes such as UCK2 , EZH2 , and ALDH3A1 , and markedly downregulated genes such as LRAT ( Figure 2A,2B ). Univariate Cox regression analysis revealed 119 prognostic-associated metabolic genes, of which 60 were associated with unfavorable prognosis and 59 served as protective factors ( Figure 2C ; Table S1 ). Mutational profiling demonstrated alterations in all patients, with CPS1 and HK3 exhibited the highest mutation frequencies ( Figure 2D ). Further genomic characterization revealed recurrent CNVs, with FLAD1 and FDPS showed the highest amplification frequencies and LPL and ASPA displayed the most frequent deletions ( Figure 2E ). Chromosomal mapping indicated that these amplifications and deletions were distributed across multiple loci ( 39 ), underscoring the genome-wide structural instability of metabolic-related genes in HCC ( Figure 2F ). Figure 1 Flow chart of the research. GSEA, gene set enrichment analysis; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma. Figure 2 Metabolic landscape of hepatocellular carcinoma. (A) Heatmap of metabolism-related gene expression between tumor and normal tissues. (B) Volcano plot of differentially expressed metabolism-related genes in HCC. (C) Univariate Cox regression forest plot of prognostic metabolism-related genes. (D) Mutation landscape of metabolism-related genes across HCC samples. (E) CNV frequency of metabolism-related genes. (F) Circos of chromosomal locations and alterations of metabolism-related genes. CI, confidence interval; CNV, copy number variation; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma. Two molecular clusters with distinct clinical and biological characteristics were identified in HCC Consensus clustering of 119 metabolic-related genes identified two subgroups with the optimal number of clusters was determined as k =2 ( Figure 3A ). This classification was consistently validated by PCA, t-SNE, and UMAP, all showing clear separation between clusters ( Figure 3B-3D ). Patients in Cluster 1 showed higher expression of metabolism-related genes and more advanced stages and grades ( Table S2 ). Survival analysis confirmed poorer outcomes in Cluster 1 ( Figure 3E ), ssGSEA revealed distinct signatures, with Cluster 1 was enriched in terpenoid, polyketide, and glycan metabolism, while Cluster 2 showed higher lipid and carbohydrate metabolism ( Figure 3F ; table available at https://cdn.amegroups.cn/static/public/tcr-2025-aw-2444-1.xlsx ). These results demonstrated biologically meaningful heterogeneity in HCC. Figure 3 Identification and characterization of HCC clusters. (A) Consensus clustering matrix (k =2) defining two distinct molecular subtypes. (B) PCA showing clear separation between clusters. (C) t-SNE plot illustrating distribution of samples according to cluster assignment. (D) UMAP visualization further confirming cluster separation. (E) Kaplan-Meier overall survival curves of patients stratified by clusters. (F) Heatmap displaying differential expressions of representative metabolic gene sets across the two clusters. PCA, principal component analysis; ssGSEA, single-sample gene set enrichment analysis; t-SNE, t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding; UMAP, Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection. As depicted in Figure 4A , Cluster 1 which was with poorer prognosis, exhibited markedly higher infiltration of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), suggesting that these cells contributed to the establishment of an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. In contrast, Cluster 2 had more favorable outcomes indicated by the lower levels of MDSCs, consistent with a relatively more active anti-tumor immune response. Furthermore, patients in Cluster 1 displayed higher immune scores and immune cell infiltrations ( Figure 4B,4C ). For example, the infiltration levels of macrophages, follicular helper T (Tfh) cells, and regulatory T (Treg) cells were elevated in Cluster 1, while natural killer (NK) cells and T helper 17 (Th17) cells exhibited reduced infiltration levels. Consistently, the comprehensive comparison of Cluster Function Boxplot ( Figure 4D,4E ) further highlighted the immunological divergence between the two clusters, demonstrating that Cluster 1 was enriched in functions like checkpoint and T cell co-inhibition, which critically regulated T cell activation, and their imbalance in HCC reshaped the tumor immune microenvironment, facilitating tumor progression ( 40 ). In contrast, Cluster 2 was relatively enriched in angiogenesis, and type I/II interferon (IFN) response. Both angiogenesis and type I/II IFN responses shaped the tumor microenvironment in HCC, and their dysregulation disrupted effective antitumor immunity, thereby facilitating tumor progression ( 41 , 42 ). Figure 4 Immune characteristics and genomic alterations of HCC clusters. (A) Comparison of MDSC infiltration between clusters. (B) Immune scores estimated by the ESTIMATE algorithm across clusters. (C) Stromal scores estimated by the ESTIMATE algorithm across clusters. (D) Differences in immune cell infiltration between clusters. (E) Differences in immune-related functional pathways between clusters. (F,G) GSEA results between the (F) C1 and (G) C2 subtypes. (H,I) Different genetic mutation characteristics between the (H) C1 and (I) C2 subtypes. (J) Different amplification and deletion frequency between C1 and C2 subtypes. (K) Composite copy number profiles with gains in red and losses in blue and grey highlighting differences between C1 and C2 subtypes. *, P&lt;0.05. aDCs, activated dendritic cells; APM, antigen processing and presentation machinery; CCR, C-C chemokine receptor; DCs, dendritic cells; GSEA, gene set enrichment analysis; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; iDCs, immature dendritic cells; IFN, interferon; MDSC, myeloid-derived suppressor cell; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NK, natural killer; pDCs, plasmacytoid dendritic cells; Tfh, follicular helper T cells; Th17, T helper 17; Tregs, regulatory T cells. Distinct molecular functional profiles were identified between the two clusters. GSEA ( Figure 4F,4G ) analyses revealed that Cluster 1 was markedly enriched in tumor-associated programs, including epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), E2F targets, G2M checkpoint regulation, and cell cycle progression, highlighting uncontrolled proliferation, genomic instability, and enhanced metastatic potential ( 43 - 46 ). Moreover, immune-inflammatory pathways such as allograft rejection and inflammatory response were also significantly activated, suggesting that aberrant immune activation and chronic inflammation might have synergistically promoted tumor progression ( 47 , 48 ). Cluster 2 exhibited a metabolic-centered phenotype enriched in fatty acid and bile acid metabolism, reflecting preserved liver functions and reprogramming ( 49 , 50 ). These findings defined two oncogenic states, one proliferation and inflammation driven and the other metabolism dominated, underscoring HCC heterogeneity and therapeutic implications. Genetic mutations drove cancer initiation and progression by disrupting oncogenes, tumor suppressors, and key signaling pathways, thereby promoting uncontrolled proliferation and genomic instability ( 51 ). Consistently, Cluster 1 displayed a higher mutation burden with frequent TP53 mutations, while CTNNB1 mutations predominated in Cluster 2 ( Figure 4H,4I ) ( 52 , 53 ). Notably, DOCK2 was uniquely regulated in Cluster 1, potentially influencing lymphocyte migration, whereas APOB was exclusively altered in Cluster 2, linking lipid transport dysfunction to metabolic reprogramming ( 54 , 55 ). These molecular distinctions highlighted divergent metabolic-immune phenotypes that might have informed differential therapeutic responses. CNVs were a hallmark of cancer, driving genomic instability and influencing tumor progression and patient outcomes ( 56 ) ( Figure 4J ). Through integrative analysis of CNV patterns and gene expression, we identified four critical genes: MYC , WWOX , ID3 and GSTZ1 , which stratified prognosis in HCC (table available at https://cdn.amegroups.cn/static/public/tcr-2025-aw-2444-2.xlsx ), underscoring the role of CNV-driven alterations in clinical heterogeneity ( 57 - 60 ). Consistently, GISTIC analysis revealed that Cluster 1 exhibited broad CNV alterations, with amplifications on 1q, 8q and 20q and deletions on 4q and 17p, whereas Cluster 2 displayed a more focal pattern ( Figure 4K ). Collectively, these findings suggested that the extensive genomic instability of Cluster 1 underlays its more aggressive subtype and poorer prognosis. Construction and evaluation of the prognostic predictive value of risk score Based on 119 prognostic-related metabolic genes, we employed an ensemble-learning strategy with 10-fold cross-validation to build 101 algorithmic combinations. Under the algorithm framework, the MEPM was constructed by integrating StepCox and Enet algorithms, which yielded the highest average ( Figure 5A ). Using a StepCox (both) combined with Enet (&alpha; =0.7) screening pipeline, we identified nine metabolic-related genes with prognostic significance: EZH2 , PIGU , UQCRH , G6PD , ADH4 , ENO1 , LPCAT1 , AKR1B15 , and FTCD . Results highlighted that AKR1B15 , FTCD , PIGU and EZH2 were prominent contributors to predicting survival outcomes. Positive SHAP values of AKR1B15 , PIGU , and EZH2 indicated that higher expression contributed to an increased predicted risk of mortality, highlighting them as risk-enhancing factors, whereas FTCD expression was associated with a reduced predicted risk ( Figure 5B,5C ). Figure 5 Development and validation of the prognostic risk model. (A) Combining 101 machine learning algorithms for prognostic models via 10-fold cross-validation and identifying the best one by C-index as the MEPM. (B) SHAP values of metabolic genes and (C) the bar plot illustrates the mean absolute SHAP. (D) Survival status curve based on risk scores in TCGA. (E) Survival status of HCC patients in the TCGA cohort based on risk score, showing increased mortality in the high-risk group. (F-I) Kaplan-Meier survival curve analysis between high- and low-risk groups in TCGA, ICGC, GSE148355, OEP000321 cohorts. CI, confidence interval; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HR, hazard ratio; ICGC, International Cancer Genome Consortium; MEPM, metabolic prognostic model; SHAP, SHapley Additive exPlanations; TCGA, The Cancer Genome Atlas. Patients were stratified into high- and low-risk groups by the median risk score. Risk-curve analyses showed a monotonic increase in mortality with rising scores and shorter survival in the high-risk group, and these findings were consistently reproduced in external validation cohorts ( Figure 5D,5E ; Figure S1A-S1F ). Across TCGA, OEP000321, GSE148355, and ICGC, the risk score demonstrated strong discrimination for 1-, 2-, and 3-year survival ( Figure 5F-5I ), underscoring the model&rsquo;s clinical utility. A sankey diagram further showed that low-risk patients predominantly mapped to Cluster 1 (enriched for survivors), whereas high-risk patients with higher scores mainly fell into Cluster 2 (enriched for deaths), indicating that metabolic Cluster 2 aligned with a low-risk group and Cluster 1 with a high-risk group ( Figure 6A ). Figure 6 Construction and evaluation of a nomogram for predicting personalized patient 1-, 2-, and 3-year OS. (A) Sankey diagram illustrates the associations between metabolic subtypes, risk score groups, and survival status in the TCGA-LIHC cohort. (B) Forest plot of risk scores and clinical features used in univariate Cox regression analysis. (C) Forest plot of risk scores and clinical features used in multivariate Cox regression analysis. (D) Correlation analysis between risk scores and patients in different stages in the TCGA dataset. (E) Comprehensive nomogram for predicting 1-, 2-, and 3-year OS probabilities in an HCC patient with a score of 76 in the TCGA dataset. (F-I) ROC curves comparing the risk score, nomogram, and individual clinical features in (F) TCGA, (G) ICGC, (H) GSE148355 and (I) OEP000321 cohorts. (J-M) Calibration curves for the nomogram&rsquo;s predicted survival outcomes in (J) TCGA, (K) ICGC, (L) GSE148355 and (M) OEP000321 cohorts. ***, P&lt;0.001. AUC, area under the curve; CI, confidence interval; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; ICGC, International Cancer Genome Consortium; OS, overall survival; ROC, receiver operating characteristic; TCGA-LIHC, The Cancer Genome Atlas Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma. The nomogram incorporating the risk score performed excellently in predicting survival Finally, we improved survival prediction in HCC by incorporating the MEPM model and key clinical variables including age, sex, stage, and risk score into a nomogram. This tool enabled personalized survival estimation for each patient, providing clinicians with intuitive aid for individualized prognosis and decision-making ( Figure 6B ). Both univariate and multivariable Cox regression analyses confirmed Stage and risk score as independent adverse prognostic factors ( Figure 6C ). Risk scores were significantly increased in stage II and stage III compared with stage I ( Figure 6D ; Table S3 ). Owing to the remarkable prognostic predictive value of metabolism, a clinical nomogram was constructed to integrate clinical characteristics with the risk score ( Figure 6E ), facilitating straightforward estimation of individual-specific 1-, 2-, and 3-year survival probabilities. In the TCGA, ICGC, GSE148355, and OEP000321 cohorts ( Figure 6F-6I ), ROC analysis demonstrated that incorporating risk score and stage as a composite variable into the nomogram increased the predictive AUC to 0.742, which was markedly superior to that of any single-parameter model. This result was further confirmed across independent validation cohorts. Calibration curve analysis revealed close agreement between predicted and observed survival outcomes at 1, 2, and 3 years ( Figure 6J ), indicating favorable discriminative ability and potential clinical utility. To further verify model stability, external validation datasets including ICGC, GSE148355, and OEP000321 were employed ( Figure 6K-6M ), and results were highly consistent with those of the training cohort, further corroborating robustness. The risk score demonstrated close relevance to critical biological functions, notably immune regulation processes Moreover, compared with previously published prognostic models, the proposed MEPM model retained a higher C-index ( Figure 7A ; Table S4 ), highlighting its superior performance in predicting HCC survival. Notably, the model also exhibited excellent predictive performance in the validation cohorts ( Figure S2A-S2C ). To assess variations in immune status and function between risk groups, we assessed the distribution of six immune subtypes, as defined by the immune signature set ( 61 ), within the TCGA-LIHC cohort. Subtypes C1 (wound healing) and C2 (IFN-&gamma; dominant) were significantly enriched in the high-risk group, whereas C3 (inflammatory) was predominant in the low-risk group ( Figure 7B ). Guided by the foregoing biological differences, we applied GSEA to investigate potential molecular mechanisms ( Figure 7C ). The high-risk group was significantly enriched in pathways related to proliferative activity, aberrant signal transduction, and cell cycle control. Homologous recombination showed the highest enrichment score, while G2M checkpoint and cell cycle pathways also demonstrated strong enrichment trends. Instead, the low-risk group was characterized predominantly by metabolic programs, such as primary bile acid biosynthesis and steroid hormone biosynthesis ( Figure 7D ). Figure 7 Analysis of immune infiltration and immune function between high- and low-risk groups. (A) Comparative analysis with other published models. (B) Distribution of immune subtypes between high- and low-risk groups. (C) Enrichment of metabolism-related pathways in the high-risk group, (D) and low-risk group. (E) Infiltration abundance of various immune cells in high- and low-risk groups. (F-I) Scatter plots showing the correlation between prognostic risk scores and (F) macrophages, (G) Tregs, (H) NK and (I) Th17 cells. (J) Differential analysis of immune function scores between high- and low-risk groups. (K) Differences in the expression levels of immune checkpoint genes between high- and low-risk groups. (L) Differences in the expression levels of APM-related genes between high- and low-risk groups. (M) Differences in the expression levels of T cells co-inhibition-related genes between high- and low-risk groups. aDCs, activated dendritic cells; APM, antigen processing and presentation machinery; DCs, dendritic cells; iDCs, immature dendritic cells; MEPM, metabolic prognostic model; NK, natural killer; pDCs, plasmacytoid dendritic cells; TCGA, The Cancer Genome Atlas; Tfh, follicular helper T cells; Th17, T helper 17; Tregs, regulatory T cells. Concurrently, we applied GSVA to score and compare immune-related gene sets ( Figure 7E ). The tumor microenvironment played a pivotal role in HCC progression ( 62 ). Consistent with this, the high-risk group exhibited higher infiltration of activated dendritic cells (aDCs), macrophages, and Treg cells, whereas B cells, mast cells, NK cells, and Th17 cells were more prevalent in the low-risk group. Correlation analyses revealed that the risk score was shaped by distinct immune components: macrophages and Tregs, both of which promoted immunosuppression and tumor progression in HCC, showed positive associations, whereas Th17 cells and NK cells, generally linked to antitumor activity and favorable prognosis ( 63 , 64 ), were negatively associated ( Figure 7F-7I ). Next, we evaluated immune functions across the high- and low-risk groups, where a higher score denoted stronger immune activity ( Figure 7J ). The low-risk group exhibited more active immunity, particularly angiogenesis and the type II IFN response, which with statistically significant differences. By contrast, the high-risk group showed significantly higher activity in the antigen processing and presentation machinery (APM), immune checkpoints, and T-cell co-inhibition function. Immune checkpoint proteins were closely linked to cellular metabolism during immunoregulation ( Figure 7K ). Immune checkpoints such as cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4), PD-1, and PD-L1 inhibited T-cell function at different stages of the tumor microenvironment, thereby facilitating immune escape and unfavorable prognosis in HCC, which underscored their importance as therapeutic targets ( 65 ). Accordingly, we compared the expression of immune checkpoint-related genes between the high- and low-risk groups. The results showed that most inhibitory checkpoints were significantly upregulated in the high-risk group. Consistently, differential analyses of genes involved in the APM and T cell co-inhibition also indicated higher expression levels of these immune-function modules in the high-risk group ( Figure 7L,7M ). High-risk group exhibits elevated tumor mutation burden (TMB), distinct immune escape features, and greater sensitivity to PD-1 therapy Given the significant differences in checkpoint gene expression between risk groups, we further examined associations between the risk score and key immunotherapy-related biomarkers, particularly TMB. Elevated TMB generally indicated enhanced immune recognition and had been linked to improved responses and prognosis ( 66 ). Compared with the low-risk group, the high-risk group exhibited higher TMB scores ( Figure 8A ) and TMB was positively correlated with the risk score ( Figure 8B ). Using TIDE to estimate tumor immune evasion ( Figure 8C,8D ), we observed lower TIDE and dysfunction scores in the high-risk group, with TIDE was negatively correlated with the risk score ( Figure 8E ). Notably, lower TIDE values reflected a higher likelihood of benefit from immune checkpoint blockade. In contrast, MDSC infiltration and immune exclusion scores were significantly higher in the high-risk group ( Figure 8F,8G ). As MDSCs suppressed T-cell activity and facilitated immune evasion, these findings suggested that immunosuppressed high-risk patients might have derived greater clinical benefit from checkpoint inhibition. In addition, CD274 (PD-L1) showed higher expression in the high-risk group ( Figure 8H ). we extended the analysis to anti-PD-1 cohorts GSE202069 and performed SubMap for comparative analysis ( Figure 8I ). In this cohort, the high-risk group showed a significant correspondence with PD-1 responders, whereas the low-risk group aligned with non-responders. Even after Bonferroni correction, this association remained statistically significant, suggesting that high-risk patients may have a greater likelihood of benefiting from PD-1 blockade therapy. Figure 8 Risk score model for predicting immunotherapy response. (A) Comparison of TMB between high- and low-risk groups. (B) Scatter plots showing the correlation between risk scores and TMB. (C) Comparison of TIDE scores between high- and low-risk groups. (D) Comparison of dysfunction scores between high- and low-risk groups. (E) Scatter plots showing the correlation between risk scores and TIDE. (F) Comparison of exclusion scores between high- and low-risk groups. (G) Comparison of MDSC scores between high- and low-risk groups. (H) Comparison of CD274 expression between high- and low-risk groups. (I) SubMap analysis of risk groups and PD-1 response. MDSC, myeloid-derived suppressor cell; PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1; TIDE, Tumor Immune Dysfunction and Exclusion; TMB, tumor mutational burden. The risk score was closely related to the patients&rsquo; sensitivity to certain drugs Furthermore, we screened promising compounds for HCC patients in high-risk and low-risk groups from the GDSC database. These compounds exhibited significant inhibitory effects on tumor cells, making them excellent candidates for improving the prognosis of patients in both high-risk and low-risk groups. By calculating the correlation between drug sensitivity (IC 50 ) and risk scores, we identified 63 out of 198 compounds that were sensitive to patients in both risk groups and correlated with risk scores ( Table S5 ). The eight compounds with the highest correlation to risk scores were afatinib, alpelisib, axitinib, fludarabine, GSK2606414, IWP-2, JQ1, and MIRA-1 ( Figure 9A ). We further investigated the roles of these drugs in targeted pathways and found that eight sensitive compounds primarily targeted the EGFR, PI3K/MTOR, RTK, DNA replication, Metabolism, WNT, Chromatin other, and p53 signaling pathways, respectively ( Figure 9B ). As illustrated in the figure, the imputed sensitivity score of afatinib, alpelisib, MIRA-1, and IWP-2 was significantly decreased in the high-risk HCC patients, implying a reinforced sensitivity with higher risk score in HCC patients ( Figure 9C-9F ). On the contrary, certain compounds such as axitinib, fludarabine, GSK2606414, and JQ1, revealed lower imputed sensitivity scores, demonstrating a latent increase in sensitivity to drugs in low-risk HCC patients ( Figure 9G-9J ). These results emphasized that the MEPM could be used to assess the drug sensitivity of HCC patients, and prognostic model genes might have become prospective targets for overcoming drug resistance in HCC. Figure 9 Drug sensitivity analysis between high- and low-risk groups. (A) Association with selected compounds from the GDSC in the TCGA-LIHC cohort. (B) Targeted signaling pathways of candidate compounds from the GDSC database in the TCGA-LIHC cohort. (C-J) Differences in drug sensitivity (IC50, log-transformed) of candidate drugs between high- and low-risk groups. GDSC, Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer; IC50, half-maximal inhibitory concentration; TCGA-LIHC, The Cancer Genome Atlas Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma. Subsequently, by interpreting the results from immunohistochemical experiments of the proteins encoded by these nine genes, it was confirmed that their expression differed between HCC tissues and normal tissues ( Figure 10A-10I , Figure S3A-S3I ), suggesting that these genes might have served as potential biomarkers for HCC in the future. Figure 10 Immunohistochemistry results for the MEPM genes of typical samples based on HPA database. (A-I) Different protein expression levels of MEPM genes between tumor and normal tissues. corresponding to the following genes: (A) ADH4 (normal: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000198099-ADH4/tissue/liver#img ; tumor: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000198099-ADH4/cancer/liver+cancer#img ), (B) AKR1B15 (normal: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000227471-AKR1B15/tissue/liver#img ; tumor: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000227471-AKR1B15/cancer/liver+cancer#img ), (C) ENO1 (normal: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000074800-ENO1/tissue/liver#img ; tumor: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000074800-ENO1/cancer/liver+cancer#img ), (D) EZH2 (normal: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000106462-EZH2/tissue/liver#img ; tumor: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000106462-EZH2/cancer/liver+cancer#img ), (E) FTCD (normal: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000160282-FTCD/tissue/liver#img ; tumor: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000160282-FTCD/cancer/liver+cancer#img ), (F) G6PD (normal: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000160211-G6PD/tissue/liver#img ; tumor: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000160211-G6PD/cancer/liver+cancer#img ), (G) LPCAT1 (normal: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000153395-LPCAT1/tissue/liver#img ; tumor: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000153395-LPCAT1/cancer/liver+cancer#img ), (H) PIGU (normal: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000101464-PIGU/tissue/liver#img ; tumor: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000101464-PIGU/cancer/liver+cancer#img ), (I) UQCRH (normal: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000173660-UQCRH/tissue/liver#img ; tumor: image available at https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000173660-UQCRH/cancer/liver+cancer#img ). MEPM, metabolic prognostic model; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HPA, Human Protein Atlas. Discussion At present, clinical validation of biomarkers was of substantial value for identifying patients suitable for ICI therapy. Although the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had approved PD-L1 expression and TMB as immunotherapy-related biomarkers ( 66 ), their predictive performance remained limited in real-world practice, and standardized cross-cancer testing was lacking. Tissue-based analytes, for instance tumor genomic features, antigen-presentation capacity, and TME characteristics, correlated with immune responses, but because they typically captured only a single time point and spatial site, their ability to predict treatment efficacy was still constrained. Consequently, there was an urgent need for more suitable biomarkers and methods to anticipate clinical benefit from immunotherapy. Accumulating evidence indicated that metabolic genes played a key role in regulating the immune system and tumor immune microenvironment in liver cancer. Based on the gene expression profiles of 119 metabolic-related DEGs, we identified two distinct HCC clusters, and their robustness was confirmed by consensus clustering (k =2) and further validated through PCA, t-SNE, and UMAP analyses, all demonstrating significant separation. Immune infiltration shaped cancer outcomes, with cytotoxic and memory T cells predicting prognosis. By interpreting the GSVA analysis, we concluded that Cluster 1 was associated with poorer survival, exhibited dominant immunosuppression with high MDSCs ( 67 ). Simultaneously, along with elevated macrophages, Tfh and reducing Th17 cells, which often drove tumor progression via immunosuppression or inflammation, high infiltration usually predicted poor prognosis ( 68 - 70 ). Meanwhile, T cell co-inhibition indicated dysregulated T cell control and was also observed ( 40 ). By contrast, Cluster 2 showed lower MDSCs, and relative enrichment of type I and type II IFN programs, and better outcomes ( 41 ). GSEA uncovered striking and biologically coherent functional contrasts between the two clusters. Cluster 1 was dominated by tumor-promoting programs, including EMT, which enhanced invasion and metastasis, E2F target activation and G2M checkpoint dysregulation, which jointly fueled uncontrolled cell-cycle progression, and global cell-cycle signaling, reflective of genomic instability and proliferative stress ( 43 - 46 ). Importantly, these alterations were accompanied by activation of allograft rejection and inflammatory response pathways, suggesting that chronic immune activation and inflammatory signaling converged with proliferative drivers to accelerate tumor progression. Such features reshaped the tumor microenvironment by promoting Treg/MDSC-driven immunosuppression and inducing DNA damage, reinforcing Cluster 1 aggressiveness ( 47 , 48 ). In contrast, Cluster 2 displayed a distinct metabolism-centered phenotype, characterized by enrichment of fatty acid metabolism and bile acid metabolism. By preserving hepatocyte metabolic programs despite oncogenic rewiring, Cluster 2 adapted through changes in nutrient utilization and energy homeostasis rather than unchecked proliferation, likely explaining its slower progression and better prognosis ( 49 , 71 ). Cluster 1 also harbored a higher mutation burden, with frequent TP53 mutations, consistent with a phenotype of genomic instability and aggressive tumor behavior ( 52 ). By contrast, CTNNB1 mutations predominated in Cluster 2, aligning with its metabolism-driven state and reinforcing the established link between Wnt/&beta;-catenin signaling and metabolic reprogramming in HCC ( 53 ). Interestingly, cluster-specific gene alterations further highlighted divergent biology: DOCK2 , uniquely upregulated in Cluster 1, might have contributed to altered lymphocyte migration and immune evasion, whereas APOB , exclusively altered in Cluster 2, pointed to dysfunctional lipid transport as a central feature of its metabolic profile ( 54 , 55 ). Collectively, these results delineated distinct metabolic subtypes that might have informed differential therapeutic responsiveness. CNVs, large-scale chromosomal gains and losses, drove genomic instability in cancer by altering oncogene and tumor suppressor dosage, reprogramming metabolism, disrupting signaling, and reshaping the microenvironment, ultimately promoting tumor progression, therapy resistance, and clinical heterogeneity. Through integrative analysis of CNV-associated genes, we identified four candidates, namely MYC , WWOX , ID3 , and GSTZ1 , as critical determinants of prognosis. These genome-wide alterations highlighted the pivotal role of CNVs in reshaping the molecular landscape of HCC and influencing clinical prognosis. MYC amplification was recurrent in both clusters and significantly higher in Cluster 1, aligning with its poorer survival and implicating MYC as a key oncogenic driver ( 57 ). Conversely, the tumor suppressor gene WWOX exhibited more frequent deletions in Cluster 1 than in Cluster 2, and its loss was strongly associated with adverse prognosis ( 58 ). Beyond CNVs, low ID3 expression hampered Kupffer cell phagocytosis and NK/CD8 + T cell recruitment, weakening immunity and predicting poor prognosis ( 59 ). Similarly, low GSTZ1 expression led to succinyl acetone accumulation, stabilization of HIF-1&alpha;, induction of vascular endothelial growth factor A ( VEGFA ), and angiogenesis, which together contributed to poor prognosis ( 42 , 60 ). In summary, MYC amplification, WWOX deletion, and low expression of ID3 and GSTZ1 were consistently linked with impaired tumor control and unfavorable clinical outcomes in HCC. Importantly, these results underscored CNVs as both biomarkers for risk stratification and potential therapeutic targets. Although clinical staging constituted a fundamental framework for HCC management, it failed to capture the molecular and biological heterogeneity among patients. This limitation hampered the advancement of precise medicine in HCC. Therefore, there was an urgent need to identify robust prognostic biomarkers that could complement existing staging systems, guide therapeutic decision-making, and ultimately improve clinical outcomes and patient prognosis. Accordingly, we constructed an MEPM to predict prognosis and immune response in HCC and to screen nine optimal metabolic genes. We applied an ensemble-learning strategy integrating 10 machine-learning algorithms. Based on 119 differentially expressed metabolic genes filtered by univariate Cox regression, we generated 101 prognostic models. By integrating StepCox (both) and Enet (&alpha; =0.7) algorithms, we achieved the best performance and referred as MEPM. Compared with single algorithms, ensemble methods improved stability, generalizability, and predictive accuracy, and MEPM consistently outperformed other published models. Using this pipeline in the TCGA cohort, we subsequently screened nine metabolic genes with prognostic value from the DEGs: EZH2 , PIGU , UQCRH , G6PD , ADH4 , ENO1 , LPCAT1 , AKR1B15 , and FTCD . EZH2 was highly expressed in HCC, where it promoted tumor cell proliferation, activated the EMT pathway, suppressed immune cell functions, and facilitated immune evasion ( 72 ). PIGU decelerated malignant progression by activating the NF-&kappa;B signaling pathway and promoting immune escape ( 73 ). UQCRH expression was typically suppressed by promoter methylation, however, in HCC, demethylation drove UQCRH overexpression, consistent with its oncogenic roles reported in other cancers such as prostate carcinoma ( 74 ). G6PD overexpression can lead to lactate accumulation and the formation of an acidic microenvironment, which has been shown to increase tumor cell tolerance to chemotherapy ( 75 ). ADH4 is a key enzyme in alcohol and retinol metabolism and may contribute to HCC progression. It also plays a protective role in immunometabolism, and low ADH4 expression is associated with high-risk prognosis in HCC ( 76 ). As a glycolytic enzyme, ENO1 played a pivotal role in HCC progression, since its suppression markedly inhibited tumor cell proliferation, whereas its overexpression enhanced tumor growth ( 77 ). LPCAT1 is significantly upregulated in HCC tissues, and high LPCAT1 expression is associated with higher tumor grade and poorer prognosis. Knocking down LPCAT1 suppresses EMT, thereby inhibiting HCC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion ( 78 ). Loss of FTCD disrupted fatty-acid and cholesterol metabolism during hepatocarcinogenesis, further contributing to malignant transformation ( 79 ). Extending to the six immune subtypes, C3 (inflammatory) features were more abundant in the low-risk group, which represented the subtype with the best prognosis and was consistent with its favorable survival ( 61 ). By contrast, the high-risk group was enriched for C1 (wound healing) and C2 (IFN-&gamma; dominant) features, aligning with clinical characteristics of immune-rich but poor-prognosis tumors. Using the MEPM model, we computed risk scores and stratified patients into high- and low-risk groups. Across all datasets (TCGA, GSE148355, OEP000321, ICGC), Kaplan-Meier curves predicted by MEPM showed significant survival separation, indicating better prognosis in the low-risk group. In univariable and multivariable Cox analyses, both stage and the risk score emerged as independent, significant prognostic variables. A nomogram derived from the risk score provided intuitive estimates of 1-, 2-, and 3-year survival, thereby enhancing clinical utility. In GSE148355, OEP000321, and ICGC cohorts, the risk model maintained excellent discriminatory performance relative to individual clinical variables, and calibration curves showed good fit for 1-, 2-, and 3-year survival, with predicted probabilities were highly consistent with observed outcomes; the model likewise exhibited robust performance in the validation set. The high-risk group was predominantly enriched in homologous recombination, cell cycle, E2F targets, and G2M checkpoint pathways, reflecting a phenotype of enhanced DNA repair capacity, unchecked proliferation, and immune evasion that had been linked to unfavorable outcomes in HCC. In contrast, the low-risk group was enriched in linoleic acid metabolism pathways, indicating a more tightly regulated lipid metabolic program. Enhanced linoleic acid turnover may reduce pathological lipid droplet accumulation and limit oxidative stress buffering, thereby restraining tumor growth and supporting a less immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment ( 80 ). Together, these findings highlight distinct mechanisms underlying risk stratification and prognosis, with high-risk patients potentially benefiting from therapies targeting DNA repair and cell cycle pathways, while low-risk patients may be more susceptible to metabolism, providing a basis for precision treatment in HCC. Immune infiltration analysis was of great significance, as it provided insights into the tumor microenvironment and revealed how distinct immune subsets shaped tumor initiation, progression, and therapeutic response. Increased numbers of Tregs cells could suppress antitumor immune responses by inhibiting CD8 + T-cell proliferation, activation, degranulation, and the production of perforin and granzymes ( 62 ), ultimately resulting in poor prognosis. A systematic review indicated that Th17 cells exerted dual functions, as they might have both accelerated tumor progression and mediated antitumor immune responses, however, they were generally associated with improved clinical outcomes ( 64 ). In parallel, HCC cells actively recruited macrophages into the peritumoral region and polarized them toward the immunosuppressive M2 phenotype ( 81 ), thereby inducing profound immunosuppression and metabolic reprogramming, which collectively promoted HCC progression. Notably, eosinophils contributed to tumor cell eradication by engaging in complex cellular interactions with B lymphocytes, Th1/Th2 CD4 + T cells, and other granulocytes ( 82 ). In addition, NK cells were hepatoprotective and anti-fibrotic, but their activation mediated hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocyte injury ( 63 ). In summary, the bidirectional regulation of these immune cells within the tumor microenvironment likely contributed to immune imbalance and might have helped explain the survival differences observed between risk groups. Taken together, these findings underscore that the better prognosis in the low-risk group may result from enhanced activity of Th17 cells, eosinophils, and NK cells, whereas the poorer outcomes in the high-risk group are driven by Treg- and macrophage-mediated immunosuppression. Immune checkpoints, including CTLA-4, PD-1, and PD-L1, suppressed T cell activity at distinct phases within the tumor microenvironment, thereby driving immune evasion and poor prognosis in HCC and rendering them critical therapeutic targets ( 66 ). CTLA-4, PD-1/PD-L1, and B7-H4 inhibitory T-cell signals were broadly active in tumors, including HCC. These suppressive pathways impaired effector T-cell function and further promoted immune evasion ( 83 ). Similarly, the APM pathway was enriched in the high-risk group, suggesting that elevated antigen load was accompanied by impaired presentation efficiency, resulting in inadequate CD8 + T cell activation ( 84 ). On the opposite side, type II interferon (IFN-&gamma;) exerted pleiotropic effects by activating NK cells and CD8 + T cells to elicit robust anti-tumor immunity, enhancing tumor antigen expression, and promoting dendritic cell cross-presentation of tumor antigens to T cells&mdash;a pivotal step in adaptive anti-tumor responses ( 85 ). Overall, in high-risk patients, enrichment of immune checkpoints and impaired APM activity promoted immune evasion and poor outcomes, whereas IFN-&gamma;-mediated cytotoxic responses partly counterbalanced immunosuppression, helping explain the prognostic divergence between groups. Current evidence indicated that although TMB could serve as predictive biomarkers for immunotherapy in certain tumors, their incidence in HCC patients was extremely low, thereby limiting their clinical applicability ( 66 ). Therefore, this study proposed the risk score as a novel gene signature to explore its potential in predicting immunotherapy response. In addition, we found that the risk score correlated positively with TMB, and high-risk patients exhibited higher TMB features generally associated with enhanced benefit from checkpoint blockade. Using TIDE, the high-risk group showed lower TIDE and dysfunction scores, indicating a greater likelihood of response despite an immunosuppressive milieu. MDSCs played a critical role in suppressing T cell function and promoting tumor growth ( 71 ). Given that TIDE integrated both T cell dysfunction and exclusion, this finding indicated that elevated MDSCs not only drove immune exclusion but also exacerbated T cell exhaustion, thereby accounting for the poor response to immune checkpoint blockade observed in high-risk patients. In addition, As the gene encoding PD-L1, CD274 contributes critically to immune escape when highly expressed ( 86 ). We then extended the analysis to anti-PD-1 cohorts and applied SubMap in GSE202069, where the high-risk group aligned with PD-1 responders, supporting the reliability and clinical relevance of the risk score as a predictor of immunotherapy benefit. Collectively, these findings provided compelling evidence underscoring the value of the risk score for predicting immunotherapy responses in HCC. Additionally, we screened several promising compounds from the GDSC database for high- and low-risk patients, which showed different sensitivities between the two groups and significant inhibitory effects on tumor cells. These compounds were excellent candidates for improving the prognosis of both risk patients by comparison of the imputed sensitivity scores. For example, afatinib, alpelisib, and MIRA-1 were more sensitive in high-risk patients and primarily targeted signaling pathways such as EGFR, PI3K/MTOR, and p53, which were dysregulated in the high-risk group. Studies had shown that afatinib boosted anti-PD-1 therapy efficacy in HCC by inhibiting ERBB2/STAT3 signaling, which downregulated PD-L1 and alleviated immunosuppression ( 87 ). By targeting the hyperactive PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in HCC, alpelisib significantly inhibited tumor proliferation and induced apoptosis, offering a promising combination strategy ( 88 ). Studies found that the p53 activator MIRA-1, when combined with other inhibitors and Fer-1, effectively suppressed HCC proliferation both in vitro and in vivo ( 89 ). Whereas certain targeted compounds and small molecular inhibitors such as axitinib, GSK2606414, and JQ1, patients with lower risk scores demonstrated reinforced sensitivity to inhibitors of RTK, metabolism, and Chromatin other signaling pathways. Studies indicated that treatment with avelumab plus axitinib was associated with a manageable toxicity profile and showed antitumor activity in patients with HCC ( 90 ). GSK2606414 enhanced metabolic therapy (e.g., folate deprivation) by inhibiting PERK. This combination suppressed liver cancer malignancy by reducing invasiveness, migration, and upregulating pro-apoptotic proteins ( 91 ). JQ1 suppresses tumors by inhibiting MYC, modulating the microenvironment, downregulating anti-apoptotic genes, and disrupting glycolysis and glutaminolysis ( 92 ). In summary, the MEPM we constructed demonstrated significant predictive effects in evaluating the responses of HCC patients to various treatments, including immunotherapy. Overall, it was expected to become an innovative biomarker for guiding individualized treatment of HCC and offering actionable insights for personalized clinical decision-making. Although this study validated MEPM&rsquo;s strong predictive performance and potential clinical value in HCC, we still needed to recognize several limitations. First, the data used were mainly sourced from public databases and constituted a typical retrospective design, which might have involved sample-selection bias. During data processing, we excluded samples with incomplete clinical information to ensure analytical rigor and limited stage IV HCC patients, but this inevitably reduced sample size and sample size limitation of the stage IV subgroup might have affected model generalizability. In addition, stage IV HCC patients constitute the most clinically severe subgroup and are the primary population candidates for systemic therapies. Given this clinical basis, a larger cohort study restricted to stage IV HCC is warranted to further validate the correlation between the risk score and clinical outcomes in the future. Therefore, larger prospective clinical studies were still needed to further verify MEPM&rsquo;s accuracy and stability. The current nomogram is a precise prognostic tool for resectable HCC patients with routinely available surgically resected tissue specimens, and our follow-up research will focus on developing liquid biopsy-based alternative biomarkers to further expand its clinical application scope and improve its clinical accessibility. The above results enhanced, from multiple angles, the credibility of the risk score as a potential biomarker for HCC. However, the regulatory mechanisms of MEPM still require further in-depth elucidation, especially the specific molecular pathways by which it participates in HCC progression and treatment responses. In addition, future studies should incorporate clinical cohorts receiving immunotherapy and targeted therapy to comprehensively evaluate MEPM&rsquo;s translational potential under precision-medicine settings. Conclusions In this study, we comprehensively analyzed metabolic-related genes in HCC and identified two molecular subtypes with distinct clinical outcomes and immune features. By integrating RNA-seq data and machine learning algorithms framework, we developed the MEPM model based on nine key metabolic genes. This model not only outperformed previously published prognostic signatures but also reliably predicted immunotherapy response and drug sensitivity across multiple cohorts. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that metabolic alterations critically shape HCC heterogeneity and prognosis, and that MEPM can serve as a robust prognostic biomarker to guide individualized treatment strategies. Acknowledgments We thank the aforementioned public databases incuding The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC), Human Protein Atlas (HPA), Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC), cBioPortal and Hepatocellular Carcinoma Cell DataBase (HCCDB) in the text for the data access. Footnote Reporting Checklist: The authors have completed the TRIPOD reporting checklist. Available at https://tcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tcr-2025-aw-2444/rc Peer Review File: Available at https://tcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tcr-2025-aw-2444/prf Funding: None. Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at https://tcr.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/tcr-2025-aw-2444/coif ). Y.L. and Y.P. are the former research assistants of Suzhou BamRock Biotechnology Ltd. W.Z. is a current employee of Suzhou Industrial Park Biotech Development Co. Ltd. Y.C. is a current employee of Suzhou BamRock Biotechnology Ltd. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. Ethical Statement: The authors are accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and its subsequent amendments. Open Access Statement: This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the non-commercial replication and distribution of the article with the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the original work is properly cited (including links to both the formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license). See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . References Bray F, Laversanne M, Sung H, et al. Global cancer statistics 2022: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin 2024;74:229-63. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Zheng R, Qu C, Zhang S, et al. Liver cancer incidence and mortality in China: Temporal trends and projections to 2030. Chin J Cancer Res 2018;30:571-9. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Siegel RL, Giaquinto AN, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2024. CA Cancer J Clin 2024;74:12-49. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Zeng H, Chen W, Zheng R, et al. Changing cancer survival in China during 2003-15: a pooled analysis of 17 population-based cancer registries. Lancet Glob Health 2018;6:e555-67. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Brown ZJ, Tsilimigras DI, Ruff SM, et al. Management of Hepatocellular Carcinoma: A Review. JAMA Surg 2023;158:410-20. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Li P, Ding Z, Feng Y, et al. Global, regional, and national burden of hepatocellular carcinoma and contribution of nine modifiable risk factors across 185 countries/territories in 2022. Sci Bull (Beijing) 2026;71:838-49. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Khatib S, Pomyen Y, Dang H, et al. Understanding the Cause and Consequence of Tumor Heterogeneity. Trends Cancer 2020;6:267-71. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Dagogo-Jack I, Shaw AT. Tumour heterogeneity and resistance to cancer therapies. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2018;15:81-94. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Greten TF, Lai CW, Li G, et al. Targeted and Immune-Based Therapies for Hepatocellular Carcinoma. Gastroenterology 2019;156:510-24. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Ribas A, Wolchok JD. Cancer immunotherapy using checkpoint blockade. Science 2018;359:1350-5. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Havel JJ, Chowell D, Chan TA. The evolving landscape of biomarkers for checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2019;19:133-50. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Llovet JM, Castet F, Heikenwalder M, et al. Immunotherapies for hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2022;19:151-72. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Sangro B, Sarobe P, Herv&aacute;s-Stubbs S, et al. Advances in immunotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;18:525-43. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Finn RS, Qin S, Ikeda M, et al. Atezolizumab plus Bevacizumab in Unresectable Hepatocellular Carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2020;382:1894-905. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Xia Y, Brown ZJ, Huang H, et al. Metabolic reprogramming of immune cells: Shaping the tumor microenvironment in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Med 2021;10:6374-83. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Yin Y, Feng W, Chen J, et al. Immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment in the progression, metastasis, and therapy of hepatocellular carcinoma: from bench to bedside. Exp Hematol Oncol 2024;13:72. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Huang Y, Zhang Y, Zhang M, et al. Combined immunotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma: How to maximize immune checkpoint blockade synergic anti-tumor effect. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2023;189:104070. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Li X, Ramadori P, Pfister D, et al. The immunological and metabolic landscape in primary and metastatic liver cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2021;21:541-57. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Pacella I, Procaccini C, Focaccetti C, et al. Fatty acid metabolism complements glycolysis in the selective regulatory T cell expansion during tumor growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018;115:E6546-55. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Zhang Q, Wang H, Mao C, et al. Fatty acid oxidation contributes to IL-1&beta; secretion in M2 macrophages and promotes macrophage-mediated tumor cell migration. Mol Immunol 2018;94:27-35. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Hou PP, Luo LJ, Chen HZ, et al. Ectosomal PKM2 Promotes HCC by Inducing Macrophage Differentiation and Remodeling the Tumor Microenvironment. Mol Cell 2020;78:1192-1206.e10. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Mayakonda A, Lin DC, Assenov Y, et al. Maftools: efficient and comprehensive analysis of somatic variants in cancer. Genome Res 2018;28:1747-56. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Mermel CH, Schumacher SE, Hill B, et al. GISTIC2.0 facilitates sensitive and confident localization of the targets of focal somatic copy-number alteration in human cancers. Genome Biol 2011;12:R41. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Humphries MP, Maxwell P, Salto-Tellez M. QuPath: The global impact of an open source digital pathology system. Comput Struct Biotechnol J 2021;19:852-9. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Wilkerson MD, Hayes DN. ConsensusClusterPlus: a class discovery tool with confidence assessments and item tracking. Bioinformatics 2010;26:1572-3. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Lever J, Krzywinski M, Altman N. Principal component analysis. Nature Methods 2017;14:641-2. Barbie DA, Tamayo P, Boehm JS, et al. Systematic RNA interference reveals that oncogenic KRAS-driven cancers require TBK1. Nature 2009;462:108-12. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Aran D, Sirota M, Butte AJ. Systematic pan-cancer analysis of tumour purity. Nat Commun 2015;6:8971. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] H&auml;nzelmann S, Castelo R, Guinney J. GSVA: gene set variation analysis for microarray and RNA-seq data. BMC Bioinformatics 2013;14:7. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Xu S, Hu E, Cai Y, et al. Using clusterProfiler to characterize multiomics data. Nat Protoc 2024;19:3292-320. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Deng X, Thompson J. An R package for survival-based gene set enrichment analysis. PeerJ 2025;13:e19489. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Wang S, He Z, Wang X, et al. Antigen presentation and tumor immunogenicity in cancer immunotherapy response prediction. Elife 2019;8:e49020. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Rosario SR, Long MD, Affronti HC, et al. Pan-cancer analysis of transcriptional metabolic dysregulation using The Cancer Genome Atlas. Nat Commun 2018;9:5330. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] He Y, Jiang Z, Chen C, et al. Classification of triple-negative breast cancers based on Immunogenomic profiling. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 2018;37:327. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Liu Z, Liu L, Weng S, et al. Machine learning-based integration develops an immune-derived lncRNA signature for improving outcomes in colorectal cancer. Nat Commun 2022;13:816. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Jiang P, Gu S, Pan D, et al. Signatures of T cell dysfunction and exclusion predict cancer immunotherapy response. Nat Med 2018;24:1550-8. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Hoshida Y, Brunet JP, Tamayo P, et al. Subclass mapping: identifying common subtypes in independent disease data sets. PLoS One 2007;2:e1195. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Maeser D, Gruener RF, Huang RS. oncoPredict: an R package for predicting in vivo or cancer patient drug response and biomarkers from cell line screening data. Brief Bioinform 2021;22:bbab260. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Zhang Z, Cao T, Huang Y, et al. CirclizePlus: using ggplot2 feature to write readable R code for circular visualization. Front Genet 2025;16:1535368. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Chu X, Tian W, Wang Z, et al. Co-inhibition of TIGIT and PD-1/PD-L1 in Cancer Immunotherapy: Mechanisms and Clinical Trials. Mol Cancer 2023;22:93. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Reghupaty SC, Kanwal S, Mendoza RG, et al. Dysregulation of Type I Interferon (IFN-I) Signaling: A Potential Contributor to Racial Disparity in Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC). Cancers (Basel) 2023;15:4283. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Zhang K, Zhu Z, Jia R, et al. CD151-enriched migrasomes mediate hepatocellular carcinoma invasion by conditioning cancer cells and promoting angiogenesis. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 2024;43:160. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Wang R, Xu H, Hu C, et al. HOPX regulates the invasion and migration abilities of hepatocellular carcinoma by targeting SNAIL. Sci Rep 2025;15:29739. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Ariyachet C, Nokkeaw A, Tangkijvanich P. MicroRNA 885 5p regulates cell cycle progression in liver cancer cells. Int J Mol Med 2025;56:167. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Tu L, Luo J, Yin Y, et al. Bioinformatics analysis across pan-cancer and experimental validation in hepatocellular carcinoma revealed the oncogenic role of SF3B6. Front Pharmacol 2025;16:1516534. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Cho Y, Lee SE, Oh J, et al. Comprehensive profiling of RNA modification-related genes identifies RNA m(7)G binding protein CBP20 as a therapeutic target for tumor growth inhibition. Exp Mol Med 2025;57:1978-95. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Te HS, Agopian VG, Demetris AJ, et al. AASLD AST Practice Guideline on adult liver transplantation: Diagnosis and management of graft-related complications. Liver Transpl 2026;32:444-90. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Elmorsy EA, Saber S, Alhowail AH, et al. Reprogramming the hepatic immune microenvironment with mirtazapine in early neoplastic transformation: Evidence from a diethylnitrosamine-induced rat model. Chem Biol Interact 2025;421:111720. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Wang X, Klaassen CD, Chen X, et al. Pathological and therapeutic roles of bile acid metabolism and signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma: Insights from human and mouse studies. Pharmacol Rev 2025;77:100073. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Fu C, Fu W, Huang Z, et al. Long-Chain Fatty Acid Redistribution Induced by SLC27A2 Deficiency Facilitates Hypoxic Adaptation and Immunosuppression in Hepatocellular Carcinoma. Cancer Res 2025;85:4769-86. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Efe G, Rustgi AK, Prives C. p53 at the crossroads of tumor immunity. Nat Cancer 2024;5:983-95. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Wu Z, Wang Z, Zheng D, et al. RELA Ablation Contributes to Progression of Hepatocellular Carcinoma with TP53(R249S) Mutation and is a Potential Therapeutic Target. Adv Sci (Weinh) 2025;12:e00335. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Fu Y, Bonifacio-Mundaca J, Desterke C, et al. Genomic Alterations and Microbiota Crosstalk in Hepatic Cancers: The Gut-Liver Axis in Tumorigenesis and Therapy. Genes (Basel) 2025;16:920. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Sabzvar MK, Cho EB, Yuan X, et al. An inhibitor of UHM splicing factors exerts anti-leukemic activity by altering cell cycle progression and reducing lysosome acidification. Cell Signal 2025;136:112112. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Aoki T, Nishida N, Kurebayashi Y, et al. Molecular classification of hepatocellular carcinoma based on zoned metabolic feature and oncogenic signaling pathway. Clin Mol Hepatol 2025;31:981-1002. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Kaschta D, Post C, Gaass F, et al. Evaluating genome sequencing strategies: trio, singleton, and standard testing in rare disease diagnosis. Genome Med 2025;17:100. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Wang Y, Yu D, Mei Y, et al. Long-read sequencing reveals HBV integration patterns and oncogenic impact on early-onset hepatocellular carcinoma. Genome Res 2025;35:2389-405. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Liu S, Yang S, Xu M, et al. WWOX tuning of oleic acid signaling orchestrates immunosuppressive macrophage polarization and sensitizes hepatocellular carcinoma to immunotherapy. J Immunother Cancer 2024;12:e010422. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Deng Z, Loyher PL, Lazarov T, et al. The nuclear factor ID3 endows macrophages with a potent anti-tumour activity. Nature 2024;626:864-73. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Luo H, Wang Q, Yang F, et al. Signaling metabolite succinylacetone activates HIF-1&alpha; and promotes angiogenesis in GSTZ1-deficient hepatocellular carcinoma. JCI Insight 2023;8:e164968. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Thorsson V, Gibbs DL, Brown SD, et al. The Immune Landscape of Cancer. Immunity 2018;48:812-830.e14. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Xie D, Liu Y, Xu F, et al. Immune microenvironment and immunotherapy in hepatocellular carcinoma: mechanisms and advances. Front Immunol 2025;16:1581098. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Sajid M, Liu L, Sun C. The Dynamic Role of NK Cells in Liver Cancers: Role in HCC and HBV Associated HCC and Its Therapeutic Implications. Front Immunol 2022;13:887186. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Punt S, Langenhoff JM, Putter H, et al. The correlations between IL-17 vs. Th17 cells and cancer patient survival: a systematic review. Oncoimmunology 2015;4:e984547. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Xu F, Jin T, Zhu Y, et al. Immune checkpoint therapy in liver cancer. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 2018;37:110. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Holder AM, Dedeilia A, Sierra-Davidson K, et al. Defining clinically useful biomarkers of immune checkpoint inhibitors in solid tumours. Nat Rev Cancer 2024;24:498-512. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Zhu YP, Sun J, Cao XY, et al. TNFSF15 alleviates myeloid-derived suppressor cell-mediated cancer immunosuppression in mice. Acta Pharmacol Sin 2026;47:493-503. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Yang X, Deng B, Zhao W, et al. FABP5(+) lipid-loaded macrophages process tumour-derived unsaturated fatty acid signal to suppress T-cell antitumour immunity. J Hepatol 2025;82:676-89. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Yu H, Shi M, Li X, et al. Tissue-resident peripheral helper T cells foster hepatocellular carcinoma immune evasion by promoting regulatory B-cell expansion. Chin Med J (Engl) 2025;138:2148-58. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Pan B, Yao Y, Wu H, et al. N-glycosylated LT&beta;R increases the Th17/Treg cell ratio in liver cancer by blocking RORC ubiquitination and FOXP3 transcription. Cell Death Dis 2025;16:421. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Iwata T, Kondo Y, Kimura O, et al. PD-L1(+)MDSCs are increased in HCC patients and induced by soluble factor in the tumor microenvironment. Sci Rep 2016;6:39296. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Wang B, Liu Y, Liao Z, et al. EZH2 in hepatocellular carcinoma: progression, immunity, and potential targeting therapies. Exp Hematol Oncol 2023;12:52. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Liu H, Xie S, Fang F, et al. SHQ1 is an ER stress response gene that facilitates chemotherapeutics-induced apoptosis via sensitizing ER-stress response. Cell Death Dis 2020;11:445. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Park ER, Kim SB, Lee JS, et al. The mitochondrial hinge protein, UQCRH, is a novel prognostic factor for hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Med 2017;6:749-60. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Ren R, Zhang S, Peng Z, et al. Matrix stiffness regulates glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase expression to mediate sorafenib resistance in hepatocellular carcinoma through the ITGB1-PI3K/AKT pathway. Cell Death Dis 2025;16:538. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Li L, Huang YT, Wang LT, et al. ADH4-a potential prognostic marker for hepatocellular carcinoma with possible immune-related implications. BMC Cancer 2024;24:927. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Yu S, Li N, Huang Z, et al. A novel lncRNA, TCONS_00006195, represses hepatocellular carcinoma progression by inhibiting enzymatic activity of ENO1. Cell Death Dis 2018;9:1184. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Sun Q, Fu C, Liu J, et al. Knockdown of LPCAT1 Repressed Hepatocellular Carcinoma Growth and Invasion by Targeting S100A11. Ann Clin Lab Sci 2023;53:212-21. Wang S, Zhou Y, Yu R, et al. Loss of hepatic FTCD promotes lipid accumulation and hepatocarcinogenesis by upregulating PPAR&gamma; and SREBP2. JHEP Rep 2023;5:100843. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Cai X, Zhang L, Shi R, et al. Reverse Lipid Droplet Function for Hepatocellular Carcinoma Immunotherapy. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2026;65:e20609. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Wu L, Yan J, Bai Y, et al. An invasive zone in human liver cancer identified by Stereo-seq promotes hepatocyte-tumor cell crosstalk, local immunosuppression and tumor progression. Cell Res 2023;33:585-603. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Xu Y, Liu Y, Han H, et al. The predictive value of the neutrophil/eosinophil ratio in cancer patients undergoing immune checkpoint inhibition: a meta-analysis and a validation cohort in hepatocellular carcinoma. Front Immunol 2025;16:1633034. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Li J, Lee Y, Li Y, et al. Co-inhibitory Molecule B7 Superfamily Member 1 Expressed by Tumor-Infiltrating Myeloid Cells Induces Dysfunction of Anti-tumor CD8(+) T Cells. Immunity 2018;48:773-786.e5. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Alim L, Adityan S, Chen R, et al. Antigen presentation potential is variable among human ovarian tumour and syngeneic murine models and dictates pre-clinical outcomes of immunotherapy. Biomed Pharmacother 2025;187:118141. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Li F, Zhu S, Sun X, et al. Simultaneous activation of apoptosis and cGAS-STING pathway with a mitochondria-targeted dehydrocholic acid compound for enhanced hepatocellular carcinoma chemoimmunotherapy. Biomed Pharmacother 2026;195:119044. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Kusano K, Uno K, Tamahara T, et al. Metabolic Syndrome Develops Cardia Cancer via Nuclear Factor-E2-related Factor 2-Programmed Death-Ligand 1 Signaling. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol 2026;20:101629. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Yu C, Zhang X, Wang M, et al. Afatinib combined with anti-PD1 enhances immunotherapy of hepatocellular carcinoma via ERBB2/STAT3/PD-L1 signaling. Front Oncol 2023;13:1198118. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Xu H, Chen K, Shang R, et al. Alpelisib combination treatment as novel targeted therapy against hepatocellular carcinoma. Cell Death Dis 2021;12:920. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Yang T, Zhang S, Nie K, et al. WWOX-mediated p53/SAT1 and NRF2/FPN1 axis contribute to toosendanin-induced ferroptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma. Biochem Pharmacol 2025;233:116790. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Kudo M, Motomura K, Wada Y, et al. Avelumab in Combination with Axitinib as First-Line Treatment in Patients with Advanced Hepatocellular Carcinoma: Results from the Phase 1b VEGF Liver 100 Trial. Liver Cancer 2021;10:249-59. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Goyal H, Sharma R, Lamba D, et al. Folic acid depletion along with inhibition of the PERK arm of endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway promotes a less aggressive phenotype of hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Mol Cell Biochem 2023;478:2057-68. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Wang ZQ, Zhang ZC, Wu YY, et al. Bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) proteins: biological functions, diseases, and targeted therapy. Signal Transduct Target Ther 2023;8:420. [ Crossref ] [ PubMed ] Cite this article as: Wang H, Li Y, Zhang H, Ping Y, Zhang W, Chen Y, Han B. Molecular classification and construction of prognostic risk model via machine learning based on metabolic-related genes in hepatocellular carcinoma. Transl Cancer Res 2026;15(3):147. doi: 10.21037/tcr-2025-aw-2444 $(function(){ // ajax Increment Views var aid = $('#incrementArticleId').val(); var gid = $('#incrementGalleryId').val(); var postId = ''; if( gid ) { postId = aid+'/'+gid; }else{ postId = aid; } if( postId ) { $.ajax({ url:"/article/incrementViews/"+postId, type:"POST", async:true, success: function(data) { // 处理数据 console.log(data); }, }); } }) Article Options PDF 352&nbsp;views Full Text 139&nbsp;views Reporting Checklist 49&nbsp;views Peer Review File 61&nbsp;views COI Form 54&nbsp;views Download Citation Bibtex EndNote ProCite refMan refWorks Share Share on Facebook Share on Twitter document.addEventListener("readystatechange", function () { let isAddAsideEvent = false if (document.readyState === "complete") { isAddAsideEvent = document.querySelector("#aside [name^='ame-ad-'] img") if (isAddAsideEvent) { document.querySelector("#aside [name^='ame-ad-']").style.display = "block" document.querySelector("#aside").classList.add("aside_ad") document.querySelector("#aside").style.top = 0 document.querySelector("#aside").style.position = "relative" } else { let elem = document.querySelector("#aside [name^='ame-ad-']") if (elem) { elem.style.display = "none" } } } }) About Aims and Scope Translational Cancer Research (Transl Cancer Res TCR; Print ISSN: 2218-676X; Online ISSN 2219-6803; https://tcr.amegroups.com/) is an Open Access, peer-reviewed journal, indexed in Pu... AME Publishing Company AME Case Reports AME Medical Journal AME Surgical Journal Annals of Blood Annals of Breast Surgery Annals of Cancer Epidemiology Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery Annals of Esophagus Annals of Eye Science Annals of Joint Annals of Laparoscopic and Endoscopic Surgery Annals of Lymphoma Annals of Palliative Medicine Annals of Pancreatic Cancer Annals of Thyroid Annals of Translational Medicine Australian Journal of Otolaryngology Cardiovascular Diagnosis and Therapy Chinese Clinical Oncology Current Challenges in Thoracic Surgery Frontiers of Oral and Maxillofacial Medicine Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor Gland Surgery Gynecology and Pelvic Medicine Health Technology Hepatobiliary Surgery and Nutrition Journal of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine Journal of Gastrointestinal Oncology Journal of Hospital Management and Health Policy Journal of Laboratory and Precision Medicine Journal of Medical Artificial Intelligence Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Anesthesia Journal of Public Health and Emergency Journal of Spine Surgery Journal of Thoracic Disease Journal of Visualized Surgery Laparoscopic Surgery Mediastinum mHealth Pediatric Medicine Quantitative Imaging in Medicine and Surgery Shanghai Chest Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology Translational Breast Cancer Research Translational Andrology and Urology Translational Cancer Research Translational Gastroenterology and Hepatology Translational Lung Cancer Research Translational Pediatrics Video-Assisted Thoracic Surgery More Journal All content on this site: Copyright © 2026 AME Publishing Company. All rights are reserved. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply. Published by AME Publishing Company&nbsp; Address: Flat/RM C 16F, Kings Wing Plaza 1, NO. 3 on Kwan Street, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong, China. Email:&nbsp; tcr@amepc.org window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);} gtag('js', new Date()); // // 旧总站ID // gtag('config', 'UA-93753209-1',{ // 'page_path': '/ojs-tcr/article/view/113186/html' // }); // 新总站ID gtag('config', 'G-VDXEF5FRGV',{ 'page_path': '/ojs-tcr/article/view/113186/html' }); // 子站点ID，后台谷歌统计插件配置 gtag('config', 'G-C078C2E7JL'); var _hmt = _hmt || []; (function() { var hm = document.createElement("script"); hm.src = "https://hm.baidu.com/hm.js?010f4fb2da6192e9d5aaebff6463076e"; var s = document.getElementsByTagName("script")[0]; s.parentNode.insertBefore(hm, s); })(); var _hmt = _hmt || []; (function() { var hm = document.createElement("script"); hm.src = "https://hm.baidu.com/hm.js?7290a7c06e9c94a3e9f8304bbe057624"; var s = document.getElementsByTagName("script")[0]; s.parentNode.insertBefore(hm, s); })(); Session Timed Out Your session has expired. Please sign in again. Close Sign in document.addEventListener("readystatechange", function () { if (document.readyState === "complete") { if ($(window).scrollTop() > 500) { $("#back").css("display", "block"); } else { $("#back").css("display", "none"); } $(window).scroll(function () { if ($(window).scrollTop() > 500) { $("#back").fadeIn(1000); } else { $("#back").fadeOut(1000); } if (!document.querySelector(".aside_ad")) { var H = $(document).height() - $(window).height() - $(window).scrollTop(); var footerHeight = $("footer").height(); var bot = ($("#map").outerHeight(true) + $("header").outerHeight(true) + $(".breadcrumb").outerHeight(true) - $(window).scrollTop()) + "px"; var headerHeight = $("#map").outerHeight(true) + $("header").outerHeight(true) + $(".breadcrumb").outerHeight(true); var footerSh = $(window).height() - footerHeight; // var h = (200 + Math.abs(H - footerHeight)) + "px" ; var h = (-($(window).height() - H) + footerSh) + "px"; if ($(window).scrollTop() > headerHeight) { $(".aside").css("top", "0px"); if (H headerHeight) { var H = $(document).height() - $(window).height() - $(window).scrollTop(); var footerHeight = $("footer").height(); var bot = ($("#map").outerHeight(true) + $("header").outerHeight(true) + $(".breadcrumb").outerHeight(true) - $(window).scrollTop()) + "px"; var headerHeight = $("#map").outerHeight(true) + $("header").outerHeight(true) + $(".breadcrumb").outerHeight(true); var footerSh = $(window).height() - footerHeight; var h = (-($(window).height() - H) + footerSh) + "px"; $(".aside").css("top", "0px"); if (H document.addEventListener("readystatechange", function () { if (document.readyState === "complete") { // 获取表单元素 let btns = $('.action-profile form[name=profile] input[type="submit"][value="Save"].btn, ' + '.action-edituser form[name=userForm] input[type="submit"][value="Save"].btn, ' + '.action-updateuser form[name=userForm] input[type="submit"][value="Save"].btn, ' + '.action-updateuser form[name=userForm] input[type="submit"][name="createAnother"].btn, ' + '.action-createuser form[name=userForm] input[type="submit"][value="Save"].btn, ' + '.action-createuser form[name=userForm] input[type="submit"][name="createAnother"].btn, ' + '.action-createreviewer form[name=reviewerForm] input[type="submit"][value="Save"].btn'); btns.click(function (event) { event.preventDefault(); let form = $(this).closest("form"); let flag = form.name === "reviewerForm" ? onCheckSave() : true; if (flag) { let newPmid = document.getElementById("newPmid"); if (newPmid && newPmid.value) { $("#newPmid").on("ajaxComplete", function () { handleFormSubmit(form); }) $('#newPmid').trigger($.Event('keydown', {which: 13})); } else { handleFormSubmit(form); } } }); } }); // 处理数据的函数 function handleProcessInterestData() { let interestInput = document.getElementById('interestsKeywordInput'); if (interestInput && interestInput.value) { // 程序触发回车事件 $('#interestsKeywordInput').trigger($.Event('keypress', {which: 13})); } } function handleFormSubmit(form) { handleProcessInterestData(); // 这句不能删, 因为xheditor在手动提交时,数据不会同步到textarea; // 需要使用xheditor({submitID,"id")}来绑定, 或者使用手动刷新页面textaera的值 let biography = $('#biography').val(); form.submit();// 提交表单 } function onCheckSave() { let flag = true let firstElem = null let fields = document.querySelectorAll("td.label") Array.prototype.forEach.call(fields, item => { if (item.innerText.match(/\*$/)) { let elem = item.parentNode.querySelector('td.value input') || item.parentNode.querySelector('td.value textarea') if (elem && !elem.value) { flag = false; firstElem = firstElem ? firstElem : elem; } } }) firstElem && firstElem.focus(); return flag; //return true提交表单，否则不提交 }